1:2 The first treatise indeed I made concerning all things, O Theophylle, amongst those which Jesus began to do [them] and to teach,
1:3 until the day (in which), having charged the apostles through the holy spirit, those whom he chose, he was taken away to (the) heaven.
1:4 These to whom he manifested himself alive after having suffered, in many signs, through forty days manifesting himself to them, and speaking to them concerning the kingdom of God:
1:5 and eating with them, he ordered them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to stay for the promise of the Father, which ye heard from me:
1:6 because Iōannēs indeed baptised in [a] water, but ye (pron.) will be baptised in [a] holy spirit: after not many days these (things) happened.
1:7 They indeed then having assembled were asking him, saying: Lord, in this time wilt thou restore the kingdom to Israel?'
1:8 He said to them: 'It is not yours to know times or seasons, these which the Father put under his authority.
1:9 But ye shall receive [a] power, if the holy spirit should come upon you: and ye will be to me witness in Jerusalem, and all [the] Ioudea and (the) Samaria, and unto the (lit. his) end of (the) earth.'
1:10 And having said these things, as they gaze, he was lifted up; and a cloud received him from their eyes.
1:11 But they were [as] staring one at another (lit. one) of them, as he goeth (lit. he walking) up to (the) heaven. Behold, two men stood with them in white raiment;
1:12 and they said, [The] men, [the] Galileans, why stand ye gazing up to (the) heaven? This is Jesus who has been taken away up from you: this also is as he is coming, as ye saw him going (lit. walking) up to (the) heaven.
1:13 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain which is called 'That of the olives,' which is near to Jerusalem a sabbath journey.
1:14 Then, having gone in, they went up to a room (lit. place) aloft, where was abiding Petros with Iōannēs, Iakōbos and Andreas, Philippos and Thōmas, Bartholomeos and Matthewtheos, Iakōbos, he of Alpheos, and Simōn the zealot, and Ioudas, he of Iakōbos.
1:15 But all these (were) continuing together for the prayer, with (next) women, and Maria (the) mother of Jesus, and his brethren.
1:16 And in these days Petros rose in. (the) midst of the brethren, but there were many assembled together who were to be numbered (lit. make) a hundred (and) twenty names: he said,
1:17 [The] men, [the] brethren, it is necessary that the Scripture should be fulfilled, which the holy spirit said before from the mouth of David concerning Ioudas who guided them who overpowered Jesus.
1:18 Because he was being numbered amongst us, and the lot came to him of the heritage of this ministry.
1:19 This (man) indeed then bought a field from (the) reward of (the) iniquity; and he fell upon his face, he burst in the (lit. his) midst, and all that (plur.) which was inside him was poured out.
1:20 And he was manifest to all who dwelt in Jerusalem; so that they call (the) name of that field in their language 'Acheldamag,' which (is) the field of the blood.
1:21 For it is written in (the) book of the Psalms: 'Let his habitation be desolate, and let there not be him who dwelleth in it. His bishopric let another take.'
1:22 It is necessary then, among the men who came in among us, in all the time which our Lord Jesus came in and came out over us,
1:23 having begun from the baptism of Iōannēs until the day (in) which he was taken away up from us, that one of these should witness with us of his resurrection.
1:24 And they set up two, Joseph who is called 'Barsabbas,' who was named Ioustos,' and Matthewhias.
1:25 And having prayed, they said: 'Lord, thou (art) he who knoweth (the) heart of all, manifest him whom thou chosest from these two one,
1:26 to take (the) place of this ministry and this apostleship which Ioudas transgressed, having gone to his place which is his.'
1:27 And they gave lot for them; the lot came upon Matthewhias; he was counted with the eleven apostles.
2:1 And the day of the Pentēcostē having been fulfilled, they were all assembling in a place.
2:2 Suddenly there came a sound from (the) heaven as a wind rushing, and it filled all (the) house in which they were sitting.
2:3 And there appeared to them as tongues of fire, divided; and they sat upon each of them.
2:4 And they all were filled with [a] holy spirit, and they began to speak other tongues, according as the spirit gave to them to utter.
2:5 But there were some dwelling in Jerusalem, men, Jews, devout, from all nations which are under (the) heaven.
2:6 But this sound having come, the multitudes were assembled, and they were confounded, because each was hearing them speaking in his (lit. their) language.
2:7 But they were all being amazed, wondering, saying: 'Are not all these who speak Galileans?
2:8 How hear we (pron.) each of us in our language in which we were begotten?
2:9 The Parthians and the Medes and the Elamites, and they who dwell in [the] Mesopotamia, [the] Ioudea and [the] Kappodokia, Pontos and [the] Asia,
2:10 [the] Phrikia and [the] Pamphilia, Chēmi and the parts of [the] Lybē, that which is near the parts of [the] Kyrinnē, and the Romans who are among us,
2:11 the Jews and the strangers, the Cretans and the Arabians, we hear them speaking in tongues the great things of God.'
2:12 But they were all amazed, staring one at another, saying: What is this which happened?'
2:13 But others were deriding, saying: These filled themselves with new wine,' but others were saying: These are drunken.'
2:14 But Petros stood (up) with the eleven also, he lifted up his voice, he answered them, [The] men, [the] Jews and all they who dwell in Jerusalem, let this be manifested to you, and listen to my words.
2:15 For (it is) not as ye (pron.) think, that these are drunken; for it is the third hour of the day;
2:16 but this is that which he said through the prophet Iōēl:
2:17 'It shall come to pass in the last days, said God, I shall pour out from my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; and your young men shall see visions; and your old men shall dream dreams;
2:18 and even I shall pour out from my spirit upon my servants and my handmaids in that day; and they shall prophesy.
2:19 I shall give wonders in (the) heaven above, and signs upon (the) earth below; [a] blood, and [a] fire, and a blackness of smoke.
2:20 (The) sun shall be removed, it shall become darkness; and the moon shall become blood, before the great and manifest day of the Lord come.
2:21 And it shall be to every one who will pray (the) name of the Lord, (that) he shall be saved.'
2:22 [The] men, [the] Israelites, hear these my words, Jesus the Nazōreos, a man whom God manifested unto you in powers and signs and wonders, which God did through him in your midst according as ye (pron.) know.
2:23 This (man), in the ordained counsel and the foreknowledge of God, having delivered into (the) hands of the lawless, ye crucified and ye killed).
2:24 This whom God raised (up), having loosed the pangs of Amenti: because it was not possible that he should be overpowered by it.
2:25 For David saith of him: I foresaw the Lord before me always; being at my right hand, that I may not be moved:
2:26 therefore my heart was delighted, and my tongue was glad; moreover my flesh also shall dwell in [a] hope :
2:27 because thou shalt not leave my sou/ in Amenti, neither shalt thou give the holy one of thine to see (the) corruption.
2:28 The ways of (the) life thou manifestedst to me, thou shalt fill me with delight with thy face.'
2:29 [The] men our brethren, it is lawful to speak to you openly concerning our patriarch David, that he died, and he was embalmed, and his sepulchre (is) among us until to-day.
2:30 Being then a prophet, and knowing that in an oath God sware to him from (the) fruit of his loins to make one sit upon his throne;
2:31 having seen then from (the) first, he spake concerning (the) resurrection of Christ, that he left him not in Amenti, nor did his flesh see (the) corruption.
2:32 This [is] Jesus whom God raised (up), this to whom all we (pron.) are witness.
2:33 Having been exalted at the right hand of God, he received the promise of the holy spirit from the Father, he poured out this which ye (pron.) see and ye hear.
2:34 For David went not up to (the) heaven: he himself saith: The Lord said to my Lord, "Sit at my right hand,
2:35 until I put thine enemies below thy feet."'
2:36 Assuredly then let the whole house of Israel know, that God made him Lord and he made him Christ. This [is] Jesus, this whom ye (pron.) crucified.
2:37 But having heard, their heart was pained, they said to Petros and (the) rest of the apostles: What is that which we shall (lit. will) do, [the] men, our brethren?'
2:38 But Petros said to them: 'Repent, and let each of you receive baptism unto (the) name of Jesus Christ unto (the) forgiveness of your sins; and ye will receive the free gift of the holy spirit.
2:39 For yours is the promise, and your fathers, and all who are far off, whom the Lord our God will call.'
2:40 But in many other words he was witnessing to them, and he was entreating them, saying: Save yourselves from this perverse generation.'
2:41 They indeed then who received the word were baptised: and there were added to them on that day three thousand souls.
2:42 But they were continuing in the teaching of the apostles, And the fellowship of the breaking of the bread, and the prayer.
2:43 But a fear was being to every soul. But many signs and wonders were being done through the apostles in Jerusalem: but a great fear was being upon them all.
2:44 But all who believed were being in a place; and all things were being to them in common;
2:45 and they were selling their fields and possessions; and they were dividing them among all, according as each one had need.
2:46 But they were continuing daily in (e) the temple, breaking [a] bread in house, and they were taking [a] food in [a] gladness and a pure heart,
2:47 blessing God, having [a] grace with all the people. But the Lord addeth to them who are being saved daily, together.
3:1 But Petros and Iōannēs were going up to the temple at (the) hour of the prayer of the ninth hour.
3:2 But there was a man, being lame from (the) womb of his mother. This (man) they were wont to carry (lit. raise) daily and lay him at (the) door of the gate of the temple which is called (the) beautiful,' for him to receive an alms from them who go into the temple.
3:3 This (man) having seen Petros and Iōannēs going into the temple was praying them, wishing to receive an alms from them.
3:4 But Petros looked at him, with Iōannēs, he said: 'Look at us.'
3:5 But he (pron.) was thinking that he was to receive an alms from them.
3:6 But Petros said to him: '[A] silver and [a] gold are (lit, is) not to me; but that which I have I give to thee. In (the) name of Jesus Christ the Nazōreos, rise, walk.'
3:7 But he caught hold of his hand, he raised him (up). But immediately his soles and the ankle bones of his feet were made firm.
3:8 He sprang up, he stood, he walked; and he went into the temple with them, walking, springing up, blessing God.
3:9 And all the people saw him, walking, praising God:
3:10 but they were knowing him, that this is he who was sitting needing alms at the beautiful gate of the temple: they all were filled with [a] fear and [an] astonishment over this which happened.
3:11 But he caught hold of Petros and Iōannēs: all the people ran off to them at the porch which is called 'that of Solomōn,' being in.[a] fear.
3:12 But Petros having seen, answered the people. [The] men, [the] Israelites, because of what a wonder ye at this? Or why look ye at us, as though in our power or our piety we did this to cause this (man) to walk?
3:13 God of Abraam and God of Isaak and God of Iakōb, God of our fathers glorified his servant (lit. child) Jesus; He whom ye (pron.) gave (up); ye denied him before Pilatos: he indeed having decided to release him;
3:14 but ye (pron.) denied the holy, the righteous. Ye ask to be released to you a man (a) murderer;
3:15 but (the) author of (the) life ye kill, this whom God raised from them who are dead; this to whom we (pron.) witness.
3:16 And in (the) faith of his name, this (man) whom ye see and ye know,--his name (is) that which cured him, and the faith, (which) is through him, gave to him the soundness before you all.
3:17 But now, my brethren, I know that ye did it in [an] ignorance, as also your rulers.
3:18 But God fulfilled thus the things which he said since (the) first from the mouth of all his prophets for his Christ to suffer.
3:19 Repent then and return for your sins to be wiped away, that times of refreshment may come to you from before (the) presence (lit. face) of the Lord;
3:20 and he shall send to you him whom he foreordained, Jesus Christ:
3:21 this whom the heavens must receive until (the) time of restoration of all things, which (plur.) God spake from the mouth of his prophets since (the) age (began).
3:22 Mōysēs indeed said: The Lord God shall raise a prophet to you from your brethren (of) them like me; hearken to him according to all things which he will say to you.
3:23 But it shall be to every soul who will not hearken to that prophet--that soul shall be wiped away from her people.'
3:24 And all the prophets since Samuel, and those who came after him, spake and proclaimed concerning these days.
3:25 But ye are (the) sons of the prophets, and the covenant which God established with our fathers, saying to Abraam: 'All the families of (the) earth shall become blessed in thy seed.'
3:26 First indeed God raised his servant (lit. child) to you, he sent him to bless you, that each one of you might depart from his evil things.
4:1 But as they speak to the people the priests and the captains of the temple and the Sadducees rose upon them,
4:2 objecting that they were teaching the people, and they were proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection [the] from them who are dead.
4:3 And they put forth (lit, brought) their hands upon them, they threw them into ward until the morrow: already evening had come.
4:4 But many from them who heard the word believed; and (the) number of the men who believed came to be five thousand.
4:5 But it came to pass, the morrow having come, (that) the rulers and their presbyters and the scribes assembled in Jerusalem;
4:6 and Anna and Kaiapha, the chief priests, and Iōannēs and Alexandros, and all who were from (the) kindred of the chief priest.
4:7 And having set them in their midst they were asking them: ' In what power, or in what name do ye (pron.) this?'
4:8 Then Petros was filled with the holy spirit, he said to them: [The] rulers of the people, and [the] presbyters,
4:9 if we (pron.) to-day are examined concerning a good deed which was done to a feeble man, as to by whom this man was cured;
4:10 let the deed be manifest to you all, and all the people of Israel, that in (the) name of Jesus the Nazōreos, this whom ye (pron.) crucified, this whom God raised from them who are dead, in this (one) standeth this (man) before you cured.
4:11 This is the stone which was despised by you the builders, this became a chief corner (stone).
4:12 And there is not another in whom is being (the) salvation, nor is there another name below (the) heaven which was given to [the] men in which they must be saved.
4:13 But having seen the boldness of Petros and Iōannēs, and having known that they were men who knew not writing, and were unlearned, they were wondering; but they were knowing them, that they were being with Jesus.
4:14 But the man also they were seeing standing with them cured; but they were not being able to resist them in anything.
4:15 But having commanded that they should put (lit, throw) them out of the council, they were speaking to one another,
4:16 saying: What shall (lit. will) we do to these men? That indeed a sign was done through them which is manifest, all who dwell in Jerusalem know: it is not possible for us to deny.
4:17 But that the thing may not spread abroad further among the people, let us threaten them, that they speak not to any man in this name.'
4:18 And having called them they ordered them not to utter at all, nor to teach in (the) name of Jesus.
4:19 But Petros and Iōannēs said to them, If it is righteous before God to hearken to you rather than God, judge ye:
4:20 for it is not possible for us (pron.) not to speak the things which we saw and which we heard.
4:21 But they (pron.) having threatened them, released them; they found no pretext against them concerning the manner of pnnishing them, because of the people; because all were glorifying God because of that which was done.
4:22 The man had been more than forty years (old), on whom this signal work of curing was done.
4:23 But having been released, they came unto them of their own, they showed to them all things which the chief priests and the presbyters did to them.
4:24 But having heard, they lifted up their voice toward God together, they said: Our Master, thou (art) he who made (the) heaven and (the) earth, the sea and all things which are in it:
4:25 he who said in the holy spirit from the mouth of our father David concerning thy servant (lit, child): "Why cried out Gentiles? Peoples meditated empty things.
4:26 The kings of (the) earth stood (up), the rulers also assembled together to oppose the Lord and his Christ."
4:27 For in [a] truth assembled in this city upon thy servant (lit, child) Jesus whom thou anointedst, Ērōdēs and Pontios Pilatos, with other Gentiles and peoples of Israel,
4:28 to do all things which thy hand and thy counsel foreordained to be done.
4:29 And now, Lord, look upon their angers: give to thy servants to speak in all boldness,
4:30 in (the) stretching forth thy hand for healings and signs and wonders, to be done through thy holy servant (lit, child) Jesus.'
4:31 And having prayed, the place in which they were being assembled was shaken. And they all were filled with the holy spirit, and they were speaking the word of God in a great boldness.
4:32 But the multitudes who believed were being of one heart and one soul. There was not any one saying of any of his goods that they were his own; but (i.) all things were being to them in common.
4:33 But in [a] great power were the apostles giving [the] witness of (the) resurrection, of Jesus Christ our Lord: but [a] great grace was being upon all.
4:34 For there was not he who had need among them: for they who had fields were selling them; they were bringing (the) price of the things which are sold;
4:35 they were laying them at the feet of the apostles: but they were giving to each that of which he had need.
4:36 But Joseph, who was named 'Barsabas'; from the apostles, which is being interpreted (the) son of (the) consolation,' being a Levite, Cypriote in his race,
4:37 having (a) field, he sold it, he brought the money, he laid it at (the) feet of the apostles.
5:1 But a man also whose name is Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a field for its price;
5:2 his wife knowing, he took away by stealth from the price of the field, but he brought a part, he laid it at the feet of the apostles.
5:3 But Petros said to him: 'Ananias, why did Satan fill thy heart to say falsehood to the holy spirit, and to take away by stealth from the price of the field?
5:4 Abiding, was it not abiding to thee? And having sold it, was it not under thine authority? Why then puttest thou this thing in thy heart, having said falsehood not to man but to God?'
5:5 But Ananias hearing these words fell, he expired. But a great fear came upon all who heard these (things).
5:6 The young men rose, they wrapped him round, and having brought him out, they buried him.
5:7 But it happened (that), nearly three hours having passed, his wife came in, not knowing that which happened.
5:8 Petros said to her: Say to me whether ye sold the field for this silver.' But she said: Yea, for this.'
5:9 But Petros said to her: Why was this thing agreed upon by you to tempt the spirit of the Lord? Behold the feet of them who buried thy husband are at the doors, they will carry thee out also.'
5:10 But she fell at his feet, she expired. The young men having come in, found her dead; having taken her away, they laid her by her husband.
5:11 A great fear came upon all the church, and on all who heard these (things).
5:12 But through (the) hands of the apostles many signs and wonders Were being done among the people; and they all were assembling together at the porch of Solomōn.
5:13 But among the rest no one dared join himself to them, but the people were exalting them;
5:14 but the more were adding themselves to the Lord, believers many men and women.
5:15 So that they brought out them who were sick into the streets, and laid them upon beds and resting-places, that as Petros is to pass by, at the least his shadow may come upon one of them.
5:16 But the multitudes of the cities which were around Jerusalem were coming, bringing them who were sick, and them who were vexed with the unclean spirits: but all these are cured through them.
5:17 But the chief priest rose, and all they who were with him, which (is) (the) sect of the Sadducees; they were filled with jealousy;
5:18 they put forth (lit. brought) their hands upon the apostles, and they put them into the common prison.
5:19 But an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the prison in the night, he brought them out, he said to them:
5:20 'Go ye, speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.'
5:21 But having heard, they (rose) early, they went to the temple, they were teaching. But the chief priest having risen, and all they who were with him, they assembled to the council, and all the elders of (the) sons of Israel, and they sent to the prison-house to bring them.
5:22 But the officers having come, found them not in the prison; but having returned, they showed to them,
5:23 saying: 'We found indeed the prison-house shut in all security, and the keepers standing at the doors; but (these) having been opened, we found not any within.'
5:24 But the captains of the temple and the chief priests having heard these words, were being amazed concerning them, as towhat was this which happened.
5:25 But one came, he showed to them: Behold, the men whom ye put in the prison stand in the temple, teaching the people.'
5:26 Then the captain went with the officers, they brought them, not by force; for they wore fearing the people lest by any means they should stone them.
5:27 But having brought them, they set them in the council. The chief priest asked them,
5:28 saying: 'In an order we ordered you not to teach in this name: lo, ye filled all Jerusalem with your teaching; and ye think to bring (the) blood of this man upon us.'
5:29 Petros answered and the apostles, they said: We ought to hearken to God rather than [the] men.
5:30 God of our fathers raised Jesus. This (one) upon whom ye (pron.) put forth your hands, having hanged him on a tree:
5:31 this (one) God exalted as prince, as saviour with his right hand, to give [a] repentance to Israel, and (the) forgiveness of sins.
5:32 And we (pron.) in him are witness of these very words: but God gave the holy spirit to them who hearken to him.'
5:33 But having heard these (things) they gnashed their teeth at them, and they were wishing to kill them.
5:34 One rose (up) in the council, he was a Pharisee whose name was Gamaliēl, he was a teacher of the law honoured by all the people. He commanded to put (lit. throw) the men forth for a little.
5:35 He said to them: [The] men, [the] Israelites, give heed to yourselves concerning these men, as to what it is which ye do.
5:36 For before these days rose one called Theutēs, saying that I am (he). Four hundred of men in number followed him, and he having been killed, all who were obeying him were overthrown, having become nothing.
5:37 After this rose Ioudas the Galilean in the days of the enrolment, and he drew many after (lit. behind) him, and he also perished; all who were obeying him were overthrown.
5:38 And now, I say to you, withdraw from these men, and release them: because if this counsel or this work is from [the] men, then it will be overthrown,
5:39 If it is from God, it is not possible for you to overthrow it, lest haply ye be found opposers of God.'
5:40 They hearkened to him; they called the apostles; they beat them; they ordered them not to teach in (the) name of Jesus; they released them.
5:41 They (pron.) indeed then were walking (away) rejoicing, from (the) presence (lit. face) of the council, because they were made worthy to be dishonoured for this name.
5:42 They were being in the temple daily, and they cease not teaching in house, proclaiming Jesus Christ.
6:1 But in these days the disciples having been multiplied, there was a murmuring of the Greeks against the Hebrews, because they were not attending to the daily ministry of their widows.
6:2 But the twelve apostles called the multitude of the disciples, they said to them, The thing is not pleasing to us to leave the word of God, and minister at tables.
6:3 Make (lit. find) inquiry then, our brethren, for seven men from you, witnessed unto, full of (the) spirit and wisdom, that we may put them over the need;
6:4 and we (pron.) may have leisure for the prayer, and the ministry of the word.
6:5 And the word pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephanos from them, he was a man full of (the) faith and the holy spirit, and Philippos, and Prochōros, and Nicanōr, and Timōn, and Parmena, and Nikolaos, the stranger, native of (the) Antiochia.
6:6 Having set these before the apostles, and having prayed, they laid hand upon them.
6:7 And the word of God grew; (the) number of the disciples was multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; but a great multitude of the priests hearkened to (the) faith.
6:8 But Stephanos, full of grace and power, was doing great signs and wonders and powers among the people.
6:9 But (there) rose (up) some from the synagogue, whom they call the Libertines and the Cyrenians and the men of Rakoti and the men of (the) Kylikia and [the] Asia, questioning (lit, seeking) with Stephanos.
6:10 And they could not oppose the wisdom and the spirit in which he was speaking.
6:11 Then came men, saying: We (pron.) heard him saying words of blasphemy at Mōysēs and God.'
6:12 But they moved the people and the presbyters and the scribes; they rose, they carried him off, they brought him into the council,
6:13 they set up false witnesses, saying: This man ceaseth not, saying words against this holy place and the law:
6:14 for we heard him saying, that Jesus the Nazōreos himself will overthrow this holy place, he will change the customs which Mōysēs delivered to us.'
6:15 They who sat in the council, having all gazed upon him, saw his face as (the) face of an angel.
7:1 But the chief priest said to him: 'Are these (things) thus?
7:2 But he (pron.) said, [The] men, our brethren and our fathers, hear: God of (the) glory manifested himself to our father Abraam, being in [the] Mesopotamia, before that he dwelt in Charran,
7:3 he said to him: 'Come from thy land and from thy kindred, come to the land which I shall (lit. will) show to thee.'
7:4 Then he came from (the) land of the Chaldeans, he dwelt in Charran: but from there, after his father died, he removed to dwell in this land, this on which ye (pron.) now dwell.
7:5 He gave not to him an inheritance in it, not even, a step of a foot: he promised to give it to him in a possession, and (to) his seed after him, but he had not son.
7:6 But God spake thus: Thy seed shall be sojourners in a strange land, and they shall make them servants, and they shall afflict them four hundred years.
7:7 And the nation to which they will be servants I (pron.) shall judge, said God, and after these (things) they shall come out, they shall serve me in this very place.'
7:8 And he gave to him a covenant of (the) circumcision: and thus he begat Isaak, and he circumcised him in the eighth day. And Isaak begat Iakōb, Iakōb begat the twelve patriarchs.
7:9 And the patriarchs were jealous of Iōsēph, they sold him into Chēmi; and God was being with him.
7:10 He saved him from all his afflictions; he gave to him [a] grace and [a] wisdom before Pharaō (the) king of Chēmi; he made him governor over Chēmi and over all his house.
7:11 But a famine came over all Chemi and Chanaan, and a great affliction: and our fathers were not finding corn.
7:12 But Iakōb heard that they sell corn in Chēmi; he sent our fathers first.
7:13 And in the second time Iōsēph manifested himself to his brethren; and (the) race of Iōsēph was made known to Pharaō.
7:14 But Iōsēph sent, he called Iakōb his father and all his kindred, Amounting to seventy-five souls.
7:15 But Iakōb came down to Chēmi; and be died, he and our fathers.
7:16 And they removed him to Sychem, they laid him in the sepulchre which Abraam bought for a price of silver from (the) sons of Emōr in Sychem.
7:17 But according as (the) time of the promise concerning which God sware to Abraam approached, the people grew and was strengthened, it multiplied in Chēmi.
7:18 Until rose another kin over Chēmi, knowing not Joseph.
7:19 This (one) dealt craftily with our race, he afflicted our fathers, to make them cast out their little children (so as) not to keep them alive.
7:20 But in that time Mōysēs was born; he was exceeding fair; this (one) was nourished three months in (the) house of his father.
7:21 But having been cast out, (the) daughter of Pharaō took him away.
7:22 And Mōysēs was taught all wisdom of the men of Chēmi; he was being strong in his words and his works.
7:23 But forty years of time having been completed, it came upon his heart to visit his brethren, (the) sons of Israel.
7:24 But having seen one being wronged, he had compassion, he avenged him who was being afflicted, he killed the man of Chēmi.
7:25 But he was thinking that his brethren will understand that God will give [a] salvation to them through him. But they (pron.) understood not.
7:26 But on the morrow he manifested himself to others who were disputing, and he was reconciling them for [a] peace, saying: Ye are men (and) brethren, why do ye wrong to one another?'
7:27 But he who did wrong to his neighbour denied him, saying: 'Who made thee ruler or judge over us?
7:28 Wishest thou (pron.) to kill me, as thou killedst the man of Chēmi yesterday?'
7:29 But Mōysēs fled at this word; he was a sojourner in (the) land of Madiam, where he begat two sons.
7:30 But forty years having been completed, an angel manifested himself to him in (the) desert of (the) mountain of Sina in a flame of fire upon a bush.
7:31 But Mōysēs having seen the vision, wondered: but being about to come to behold it, a voice of the Lord came, saying:
7:32 'I am God of thy fathers, God of Abraam and God of Isaak and God of Iakōb.' But Mōysēs trembled, he dared not to behold him.
7:33 But the Lord said to him: 'Loose the shoe from thy feet: for the place upon which thou standest is a holy ground.
7:34 In a seeing I saw (the) affliction of my people which are in Chēmi; and I heard their groaning, I came down to save them. But now come that I may send thee up to Chēmi.'
7:35 This is Mōysēs whom they denied, saying: 'Who made thee ruler or judge over us?' But this (one) God sent as ruler and redeemer by (the) hand of the angel, he who manifested himself to him in the bush,
7:36 he who brought them out, Having done signs and wonders in (the) land of Chēmi, and the sea of Shari, and in (the) desert forty years.
7:37 This is Mōysēs who said to (the) sons of Israel: 'God shall raise a prophet to you from your brethren of (them) the figures which ye made to worship them. I shall remove you to the parts of Babylon.' like me, hearken to him.'
7:38 This (is) he who was in the church on (the) desert with the angel who spake to him upon (the) mountain of Sina and our fathers. This (one) who received words of life to give them to you.
7:39 This to whom our fathers wished not to hearken, but they put him (aside), and they returned in their heart up to Chēmi.
7:40 Saying to Aarōn: 'Make for us gods, those (lit. these) which will go before us: for this [is] Mōysēs ho brought us from (the) land of Chēmi, we know not what it is which happened to him.'
7:41 And they made for them a calf in those days, and they offered a sacrifice to the idol, and they delighted in the works of their hands.
7:42 But God turned them to minister to the host of (the) heaven, according as it is written on (the) book of the prophets: 'Did ye offer to me slain beasts and sacrifices on (the) desert forty years, (the) house of Israel?
7:43 And ye took the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Rēphan,
7:44 The tabernacle of the witness which our fathers were having on (the) desert--as he commanded who spake to Mōysēs, to make it according to the figure which he saw.
7:45 This, which having received, our fathers with Iēsou took away in with them in (to) the possession of the nations, whom God cast out before (the) face of our fathers, until the days of David;
7:46 who found [a] grace before God. He asked to make a dwelling-place for the God of Iakōb:
7:47 but Solomon built a house for him.
7:48 But the highest was not dwelling in fabrics of hand, according as the prophet saith:
7:49 (The) heaven is my throne, but (the) earth is (the) footstool of my feet. What house (is) that which ye will build for me, saith the Lord, or what is (the) place of my resting-place?
7:50 Did not my hand make all these things?'
7:51 [The] stiff-necked and uncircumcised in both their heart and their ears, ye (pron.) always oppose the holy spirit: as even your fathers, so (lit. and) also ye.
7:52 Which of the prophets did not your fathers persecute? And they killed them who before proclaimed (the) coming of the righteous one; this whom ye (pron.) gave (up) and ye kill him.
7:53 Ye (pron.) receive the law as ordinances of angels, ye kept it not.
7:54 But having heard these (things) they were being cut to their heart, and they were gnashing their teeth upon him.
7:55 But Stephanos, full of the holy spirit and (the) faith, looked up to (the) heaven, he saw (the) glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
7:56 and he said: Lo, I see the heavens opened, and (the) Son of (the) man standing on the right hand of God.'
7:57 They all cried out in a great voice; they stopped their ears, and they ran all together upon him;
7:58 they cast him outside of the city; they stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their garments at the foot of a young man, his name being Saulos.
7:59 And they stoned Stephanos, beseeching, saying: 'Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.'
7:60 He threw himself upon his knees, he cried out in a great voice: Lord, thou shalt not reckon this sin to them.' But having said this, he slept.
8:1 But Saulos was consenting to his being killed. But at that time happened a great persecution against the church which was in Jerusalem. But all were scattered to the countries of [the] Ioudea and (the) Samaria save the apostles only.
8:2 But devout men took away Stephanos, and they made a great wailing over him.
8:3 But Saulos was fighting against the church, going into the houses, dragging off men and women, casting them to (the) prison.
8:4 They indeed then who were scattered were passing (along) preaching good tidings of the word.
8:5 But Philippos having come into a city of (the) Samaria proclaimed the word of God.
8:6 The multitudes together were giving heed to the things which Philippos was saying, in (the) hearing and seeing the signs which he was doing.
8:7 But many of them who (had) the unclean. spirits with them, (the spirits) were coming from them, crying out in a great voice: but many also paralysed, and some being lame, he was curing [them].
8:8 But a great joy happened in that city.
8:9 But a man, his name being Simon, was being before in that city, being a sorcerer, putting all the nation of (the) Samaria beside itself, saying: 'I (am) a great (one).'
8:10 But to this (man) all were giving heed, the small and the great, saying: This is the power of God, that which is called "the great."'
8:11 They all were giving heed to him, because he had spent a great time deceiving them in his magic (plur.).
8:12 when they believed Philippos preaching good tidings to them of the kingdom of God and (the) name of Jesus Christ, men and women were coming to be baptised.
8:13 But Simon also having believed and having been baptised was continuing with Philippos, seeing the signs and the great powers being done through him, he was wondering.
8:14 But the apostles who were in Jerusalem having heard that [the] Samaria also received the word of God, sent Petros and Iōannēs unto them:
8:15 these having come thither were praying for them that they might receive the holy spirit:
8:16 for he had not yet come upon any of them: but rather they were being baptised unto (the) name of the Lord Jesus.
8:17 Then they laid hand upon them, and they were receiving the holy spirit.
8:18 But Simon having seen that through the laying hand of the apostles they receive the holy spirit, brought to them money,
8:19 saying: Give this authority to me also, that he, upon whom I shall (lit. will) lay hand, may receive the holy spirit.'
8:20 But Petros said to him: Thy silver with thee shall be unto (the) destruction, because thou thoughtest to get for thee through money the free gift of God.
8:21 Part shall not be to thee nor lot in this word: for thy heart is not right before God.
8:22 Repent then from this thy wickedness, and pray the Lord; perhaps this thought of thy heart will be forgiven thee.
8:23 I see thee in a gall of a bitterness, and a bond of (the) iniquity.'
8:24 Simōn answered, he said: Pray ye (pron.) for me to the Lord, that none of the things which ye said shall come upon me.'
8:25 They then indeed, having witnessed and having spoken the word of God, returned to Jerusalem: to many villages of the Samaritans they were preaching good tidings.
8:26 But an angel of the Lord spake to Philippos, saying: `Arise, go at (the) hour of midday upon the road which thou comest from Jerusalem to Gaza: this is a desert.'
8:27 And he arose, he went: and behold, a man, (an) Ethiopian eunuch, (a) powerful (man) of Kandakēs, of the queen of the Ethiopians. This (man) was being over all her treasure; he had come to worship in Jerusalem.
8:28 But he had returned, sitting in his chariot, and he was reading in the prophet saēas.
8:29 But the spirit said to Philippos: 'Go, join thyself to this chariot.'
8:30 But Philippos ran, he heard him reading in the prophet Ēsaēas. He said to him Knowest thou then the things which thou readest?'
8:31 But he (pron.) said: How is it possible for me to know, unless one guide me?' But he prayed Philippos that he should get up and sit with him.
8:32 But (the) place which was written, which he was reading, was this, As a sheep will be brought to (the) slaughter, and as a lamb voiceless before him who sheareth it, thus he openeth not his mouth:
8:33 his judgement was taken away in his humiliation: but his generation who will be able to speak; because his life will be taken away from upon (the) earth?
8:34 But the eunuch answered, he said to Philippos: 'I beseech thee show me concerning whom this prophet saith this, concerning himself or concerning another.'
8:35 But Philippos opened his mouth, he began to preach good tidings to him of Jesus from this Scripture.
8:36 But as they were journeying on the road they came upon [a] water. The eunuch saith Behold, [a] water ! What is it which stoppeth me from being baptised?'
8:37 Omitted
8:38 And he commanded to stop the chariot: and they came down to the water, both Philippos and the eunuch; and he baptised him.
8:39 But having come up from the water a spirit of the Lord carried off Philippos; and the eunuch saw him no more; for he was journeying on his road rejoicing.
8:40 But Philippos was found in Azōtos: he was going about, preaching good tidings in all the cities, until he came to Kesaria.
9:1 But Saulos, still full of anger and murder of the disciples of the Lord, came unto the chief priest;
9:2 he asked for letters from him to Damaskos unto the synagogues; that those, whom he will find, being of the way, the men and the women, he might bind and bring into Jerusalem.
9:3 But having journeyed, it came to pass (that), having approached Damaskos, suddenly shone upon him a light from (the) heaven,
9:4 and, having fallen upon the earth, he heard a voice saying to him: 'Saoul, Saoul, why persecutest thou me?'
9:5 But he said: Who (art) thou, Lord?' But he (pron.) said: I am Jesus whom thou (pron.) porsecutest :
9:6 but rise, go into the city; that which is right that thou should do shall be spoken to thee.'
9:7 But the men who were walking with him were standing, being amazed, hearing the voice though they were not seeing any one.
9:8 But Saulos having risen from upon the earth, his eyes were opening, but he was not seeing any one; but they caught hold of his hand, they took him away into Damaskos.
9:9 He spent three days there, he seeth not, he ate not, nor drank.
9:10 But there was a disciple in Damaskos, his name being Ananias; but the Lord said to him in a vision: 'Ananias.' But he (pron.) said: 'Lo, I, Lord.'
9:11 But the Lord said to him: Arise, go to the street which is called "that which is straight," seek in (the) house of a Jew for him whose name is Saulos, the man of Tharsos: lo, he prayed;
9:12 and he saw a man in a vision, his name being Ananias; he came in, he laid his hands upon him that he might see.'
9:13 But Ananias answered: Lord, I heard concerning this man by many, concerning all the evil things which he did to the saints of thine in Jerusalem.
9:14 And in this place also he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all who pray to thy name.'
9:15 But the Lord said: Go, because this is a chosen vessel for me, being about to bear my name before the Gentiles, and the kings, and (the) sons of Israel:
9:16 for I (pron.) shall (lit. will) show to him all the pains which he will receive for my name.'
9:17 But Ananias went, and he entered the house, he laid his hands on him, he said: Saoul, my brother, the Lord Jesus (is) he who sent me, he who manifested himself to thee on the road on which thou comest, that thou mightest see, and be filled with [a] holy spirit.'
9:18 And quickly fell from his eyes scales; he saw, and he rose; he was baptised.
9:19 Having received [a] food, he was strengthened. But he was some days with the disciples who were in Damaskos.
9:20 And immediately he proclaimed Jesus in the synagogues, that this is (the) Son of God.
9:21 But all were being amazed who heard, saying: 'Is not this he who was troubling them who prayed to this name in Jerusalem? And he came to this place for this thing, that he might bind them and take them up unto the chief priests.'
9:22 But Saulos rather was increasing in strength' and he was troubling the Jews who were in Damaskos, showing to them, that this is Christ.
9:23 But many days having been completed, the Jews took counsel that they might kill him.
9:24 But to Saulos was shown their counsel; but they were keeping the gates by the day and the night, that they might kill him.
9:25 But the disciples took him away by night, they let him down in a basket from upon the wall.
9:26 But having come into Jerusalem, he was trying to join himself to the disciples: and they all were fearing him, and they trust him not that he is a disciple.
9:27 But Barnabas caught bold of him, he brought him unto the apostles, he spake to them in what manner he saw the Lord on the road; and that he spakc to him; and in what manner he spake boldly in Damaskos in (the) name of Jesus.
9:28 And he was being in Jerusalem, going in and out with them, speaking boldly in (the) name of the Lord Jesus:
9:29 but he was speaking, he was questioning the Greeks; but they (pron.) were wishing to lay (lit. bring) their hands upon him to kill him.
9:30 But the brethren having known (it), brought him to Kesaria, they sent him into Tharsos.
9:31 The church indeed then of all [the] Ioudea and [the] Galilea and (the) Samaria had [a] peace, being edified and continuing in the fear of the Lord, and they were going on (lit. coming) growing in the consolation of the holy spirit.
9:32 But it came to pass as Petros was about to pass through all the brethren, (that) he came unto the saints who dwelt in Lydda.
9:33 But he found a man there, his name being Enea, having spent eight years prostrate upon a bed; but he was [being] paralysed.
9:34 But Petros said to him: 'Enea, Christ Jesus healeth thee: rise, make thy bed.' Immediately he rose.
9:35 But all they who dwelt in Lydda and Sarōn saw him, they who turned to the Lord.
9:36 But in Ioppē there was a female disciple, her name being Tabitha, who is interpreted and called 'the Gazelle'; she was being full of good work and the alms which she was doing.
9:37 But it came to pass in those days (that) she sickened, she died. But having washed her, they laid her in the upper place.
9:38 But Lydda was being near to Ioppē: the disciples then, having heard that Petros is there, sent two men to him, saying, (and) praying him: 'Delay not to come to us.'
9:39 But Petros arose, he walked with them. But he having come, they took him away into the upper place; all the widows stood by him weeping, showing to him the coats and the garments (which) the Gazelle (was) making, being with them.
9:40 Petros put (lit. threw) them all out; having thrown himself upon his knees, he prayed; having turned himself to the body, he said: Tabitha, rise.' But she (pron.) opened her eyes; but having seen Petros, she sat (up).
9:41 But he helped her, he made her stand. But having called the saints and the widows, he presented her to them alive.
9:42 But this work was manifested in all Ioppē: and many believed the Lord.
9:43 But he abode many days in Ioppē with one Simōn' the tanner.
10:1 But there was a man in Kesaria, his name being Kornēlios, being a centurion from the band which is called 'the Italian,'
10:2 being pious, fearing God with all his house, doing much alms to all the people, praying to God always.
10:3 He saw in a vision manifestly an angel of God: he went in unto him in (the) ninth hour: he said to him, Kornēlie.'
10:4 But he (pron.) having gazed at him, having been in [a] fear, said: 'What is (son) it, Lord?' But he said to him: 'Thy prayers and thine alms came up for a remembrance before God.
10:5 Now then send men to Ioppē; let them call one "Simon," who is called "Petros."
10:6 He (lit. this) lodgeth with one "Simon" the tanner, whose or defiled.' house is by the sea.'
10:7 The angel who spake to him having gone, he called two servants of his and a pious soldier from them who waited upon him;
10:8 having said all things before them he sent them to loppē.
10:9 But on the (lit. his) morrow (as they were) walking in the way, and having approached the city, Petros went up on the housetop to pray at the sixth hour.
10:10 But he had been hungry, he was wishing to eat: but as they prepare for him, a trance came upon him;
10:11 he saw (the) heaven opened. And a vessel let down as a great sheet of four corners;
10:12 being in it all the quadrupeds and the creeping things of (the) earth and the birds of (the) heaven.
10:13 And a voice came to him: 'Rise, Peter, slay and eat.'
10:14 But Petros said: 'Not so, Lord; because I never ate anything unclean
10:15 Again came to him the voice (the) second time: The things which God cleansed do not thou (pron.) indeed make them unclean.'
10:16 But this was done even three times, and the vessel was taken away up to (the) heaven.
10:17 But as Petros was thinking in himself what was (He) the vision which he saw, behold, the men whom Kornēlios sent, having asked for (the) house of Simon, stood at the porch.
10:18 Having called, they were asking: Doth Simon who is called "Petros" lodge here?'
10:19 But as Petros was meditating in himself concerning the vision, [but] the spirit said to him: Lo, three mon seek for thee:
10:20 but rise, go down, and walk with them, doubting not: because it is I who sent them.'
10:21 But Petros having come down unto the men, said: Lo, it is I whom ye seek for; what is the thing concerning which ye came?'
10:22 But they (pron.) said: Kornēlios the centurion is a righteous man and fearing God, being witnessed unto by all the nation of the Jews. It was shown to him by a holy angel to send for thee into his house, to hear words from thee.'
10:23 He called them in, he received them. But on the morrow he rose, he came forth with them, and other brethren from Ioppē came forth with him.
10:24 But on the morrow they came into Kesaria. But Kornēlios was expecting them. And he called his kinsfolk and his near neighbours.
10:25 But it came to pass (that) Petros having come in, Kornēlios met him; he threw himself down at his feet, he worshipped.
10:26 But Petros raised him, saying: `Rise; I also am a man.'
10:27 And he went in, he spake to them: and he found many assembled.
10:28 He said to them: Ye (pron.) know that it is unlawful for a man (being a) Jew to join himself to or to walk with an alien; and (yet) to me (pron.) God showed, not to say of any man that he
10:29 Therefore I came, ye having sent for me, I made not objection; I ask then concerning what thing ye sent for me?'
10:30 And Kornēlios said: 'Four days ago until this hour I was praying at (the) ninth hour in my house: behold, a man stood before me in [a] white raiment,
10:31 and he said: "Kornēlie, thy prayer was heard, and thine alms were remembered before God.
10:32 Send then into Ioppē; let them call Simon who is called 'Petros,' he lodgeth at (the) house of Simon the tanner by the sea."
10:33 Now then I sent for thee then; but thou (pron.) didst well having come. Now we (pron.) all are here, being before God, to hear all the things which the Lord ordained to thee.'
10:34 But Petros having opened his mouth, said: In [a] truth I see that God is not a respecter of persons:
10:35 but in every nation (he) who feareth him, and who worketh the righteousness is accepted with him.
10:36 He sent his word to (the) sons of Israel preaching good tidings of [a] peace through Jesus Christ, he is the Lord of all.
10:37 Ye (pron.) know the word which came in all [the] loudea, having begun from [the] Galilea, after the baptism which Iōannēs proclaimed.
10:38 Jesus the Nazarene, according as God anointed him in a holy spirit and [a] power: he who came to do the good, and healing every one over whom the devil had power, because God was being with him.
10:39 And we (pron.) are witness of all things which he did in (the) country of the Jews and in Jerusalem. He whom they killed, and they hanged him on a tree
10:40 This (one) God raised in the third day, and he gave him to manifest himself,
10:41 not to all the people, but to the witnesses whom God chose before, that is us, namely we who ate and we drank with him after he rose from them who are dead.
10:42 And he ordered us to proclaim to the people, and to witness, that this is he whom God ordained judge of them who are alive and them who are dead.
10:43 This of whom all the prophets witness, that through his name all who believe him should receive (the) forgiveness of their sins.'
10:44 As Petros was yet speaking these words, the holy spirit came upon 'all who heard the word.
10:45 And they of (the) circumcision, the faithful who came with Petros, were amazed, because the free gift of the holy spirit was poured out upon the Gentiles also.
10:46 For they were hearing them speaking in tongues, and exalting God. Then Petros answered:
10:47 Is it possible for any to forbid the water, that these should not be baptised, these who received the holy spirit as we also (did)?'
10:48 But he commanded them to baptise them in (the) name of Jesus Christ. Then they besought him to abide with them some days.
11:1 But the apostles and the brethren who were in [the] Ioudea heard that the Gentiles received the word of God.
11:2 When Petros went into Jerusalem, they of (the) circumcision pleaded against him,
11:3 saying: Thou wentest in unto men uncircumcised, and thou atest with them.
11:4 But Petros having begun, was speaking to them, saying,
11:5 I (pron.) was being in Ioppē the city, praying: and I saw in a trance a vision, a vessel as a great sheet coming down, let down by four corners from (the) heaven; and it came unto me.
11:6 This having gazed at, I was giving heed; and I saw the beasts of (the) earth, and the wild beasts, and the creeping things, and the birds of (the) heaven.
11:7 But I heard a voice also, saying: Rise, Peter, slay and eat.'
11:8 But I said: Not so, Lord, because never did anything unclean or defiled go into my mouth.'
11:9 But the voice answered (the) second time from (the) heaven, saying: The things which God cleansed do not thou (pron.) make them unclean.'
11:10 But this was done even three times: and everything
11:11 And behold, immediately three men stood at (the) door of the house in which I was being, having been sent to me from Kesaria.
11:12 But the spirit said to me: 'Go with them, doubting not anything.' But these six brethren also came with me; and we wont into (the) house of the man.
11:13 But he showed to us how he saw the angel in his house, standing and saying angel: 'Send to Ioppē, and call Simon who is called "Petros";
11:14 he will speak to thee words, those (lit. these) in which thou and all thy house will be saved.'
11:15 But I having begun to speak, the holy spirit came upon them, as he came upon us at first.
11:16 But I remembered (the) word of the Lord, how he was saying: Iōannēs indeed baptised in [a] water; but ye (pron.) will be baptised in [a] holy spirit.
11:17 If then God gave to them the equal free gift, who believed the Lord Jesus Christ as we also (did), who (was) I indeed to stop God?'
11:18 But having heard these things they held their peace, and they glorified God, saying: Then God gave the repentance to the Gentiles also unto (the) life.'
11:19 They indeed then who were scattered since the tribulation which happened at (the time of) Stephanos came even unto [the] Phoinikē and Kypros and (the) Antiochia, and spake to none the word except the Jews only.
11:20 But there were some from them, Kyprian men, and some Kyrinnean, these having come to (the) Antiochia were speaking to the Greeks, proclaiming the Lord Jesus.
11:21 And (the) hand of the Lord was being with them: but a great multitude believed, and they turned to the Lord.
11:22 But the word went unto (the) ears of the church which was in Jerusalem concerning them: and they sent Barnabas unto (the) Antiochia.
11:23 He having come, and having seen the grace of God, rejoiced; and was encouraging all in [the] exhortation to stay in the Lord:
11:24 because he was a good man, full of the holy spirit and (the) faith. And a great multitude followed the Lord.
11:25 But having come to Tharsos, seeking for Saulos;
11:26 and having found him, he brought him into (the) Antiochia. But it came to pass (that) having spent a whole year, assembling in the church, they taught a great multitude: but the disciples who were in (the) Antiochia were named first `the Christians.'
11:27 But in those days came prophets from Jerusalem to (the) Antiochia.
11:28 But one from them rose, his name being Agabos, he signified through the holy spirit a great famine about to happen over the whole world, which is that which happened at (the time of) Klaudios.
11:29 But the disciples, according as each one had means, each of them decided for [a] ministry to send to the brethren who dwelt in [the] Ioudea;
11:30 this having done, to send (it) to presbyters through Barnabas and Saulos.
12:1 But in that time Ērōdēs (the) king brought his hand
12:2 And he killed Iakōbos (the) brother of Iōannēs with (the) sword.
12:3 But having seen the thing was pleasing to the Jews, he went on (lit, added) to arrest Petros also. But the days wore (those) of the unleavened (plur.).
12:4 Him having arrested, he put in the prison, having delivered him to four bands of soldiers to keep him, thinking to bring him up to the people after the Paseha.
12:5 Petros indeed then was being kept in the prison: but the church was praying for him greatly to God.
12:6 But when Ērōdēs was about to bring him up, in that night Petros was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: but there were keepers at the doors keeping the prison.
12:7 And behold, an angel of the Lord came, and a light shone in the house: but having shaken (the) side of Petros, he raised him (up), saying: 'Rise quickly.' And the chains fell from his hands.
12:8 But the angel said to him: Gird thyself, and put (lit. give) thy sandal to thy foot.' But he did thus. And he said: 'Fold thee with thy garment, and walk after me.'
12:9 And having come out, he was walking after him; and he was not knowing that (it was) true which was being done through the angel, but he was thinking that (it was) a vision which he saw.
12:10 But having passed from the first place of keeping and the second, they came to the iron gate which cometh out to the city; this opened to them of itself: but having come out, they passed (through) one of the streets; and immediately the angel went from him.
12:11 But Petros having come to himself, said: 'Now I know truly that the Lord sent his angel and he saved me from (the) hand of Ērōdēs, and all (the) expectation of the people of the Jews.'
12:12 But having seen, he went to (the) house of Maria (the) mother of Iōannes who is called Markos,' the place in which many were assembling, praying.
12:13 But Petros having knocked at (the) door of the porch, a young maidservant came out to answer to him, her name being Rōdē.
12:14 And having known (the) voice of Petros, from [the] joy she opened not the gate, but having run in, she showed to them that Petros stood at the porch.
12:15 But they (pron.) said to her: 'Thou art mad.' But she (pron.) was affirming that thus it was. But they (pron.) said: 'It is his angel.'
12:16 But Petros was continuing knocking: but having opened, and having seen him, they were amazed.
12:17 But he beckoned to them with his hand: 'Hold your peace.' And he spake before them in what manner the Lord brought him from the prison. But he said to them: 'Show to Iakōbos and the brethren these things.' And having come forth, he went to another place.
12:18 But the day having come, there was no small trouble among the soldiers as to what then (is) that which happened to Petros.
12:19 Ērōdēs having sought for him, and having found him not, he tortured the keepers, he commanded to kill them. And having come from [the] Ioudea into Kesaria, he abode there.
12:20 But he was being in [a] wrath, opposing them of Tyros and Tsidōn: but they came together unto him. And having persuaded Plastos, who was over the chamber of (the) king, they were asking [a] peace, because that their country was being nourished from his kingdom.
12:21 But on a day ordained Ēroōdēs clothed himself with a kingly raiment, and having sat on the judgement seat was speaking to them.
12:22 But the multitude was crying out, saying: 'This is a voice of god, and it is not that of man.'
12:23 But immediately an angel of the Lord smote him, because that he glorified not God: and having been eaten of worms, he died.
12:24 But the word of God grew and was going on (lit. coming) multiplying.
12:25 But Barnabas and Saulos returned from Jerusalem, having completed the ministry, having brought Iōannēs also who was named 'Markos:
13:1 But there were prophets and teachers in the church of (the) Antiochia, Barnabas, and Simōn who is called Niker,' and Loukios the Kyrinnean, and Manaē the foster-brother of Ērōdēs the Tetraarchēs, and Saulos.
13:2 But as they are ministering to the Lord, fasting, The holy spirit said: Separate to me Barnabas and Saulos for the work to which I called them.'
13:3 Then having fasted and having prayed, they laid hand upon them, and they sent them away.
13:4 They (pron.) indeed, then, having been sent by the holy spirit, went into Seleukia; from there they sailed to Kypros.
13:5 And having come to Salaminē, they were proclaiming the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews: but Iōanēs also was being with them, being minister.
13:6 But having passed (through) the whole island even unto Paphou, they found a man, sorcerer, false prophet, Jew, his name being Bariēsou,
13:7 who was being with the proconsul Sergios Paulos, an understanding man. But he called Barnabas and Saulos, he was seeking to hear the word of God.
13:8 But Elymas the sorcerer was the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, [The] men, our brethren, he who hath a word of exhortation among you unto the people, say it. opposing them, for his name is interpreted (was) thus, seeking to pervert the proconsul from (the) faith;
13:9 but Saulos, who is Paulos, having been filled with the holy spirit
13:10 said, O he who is full of (it) all subtlety and all evil, (the) son of the devil, the enemy of all righteousness, ceasest thou not perverting the straight ways of the Lord?
13:11 And now, behold, (the) hand of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing (the) sun unto a season. And immediately came upon him a mistiness and a darkness; he was going about asking for him who will help him.
13:12 Then the proconsul having seen that which was done, believed; he wondered at the teaching of the Lord.
13:13 But they of Paulos and Barnabas having come from Paphou, came to Pergē of [the] Pamphilia. But lōannēs separated from them, he returned into Jerusalem.
13:14 But they (pron.), having come from Pergē, went to (the) Antiochia of [the] Pisidia; and having come to the synagogue on the day of the sabbaths, they sat.
13:15 But after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, [The] men, our brethren, he who hath a word of exhortation among you unto the people, say it.
13:16 But Paulos having risen, and having beckoned with his hand, said, [The] men, [the] Israelites, and they who fear God among you, hear.
13:17 God of the people of Israel chose our fathers and he exalted the people in the sojourn in (the) land of Khēmi, and with an exalted arm he brought them out of it.
13:18 And he nourished them forty years time in (the) desert.
13:19 And having hurled (out) seven nations in (the) land of Chanaan, he caused them to inherit their land
13:20 four hundred years: and after these things he gave judges until Sammiēl the prophet.
13:21 And from there they asked for a king: and God gave to them Saoul (the) son of Kis, a man from (the) tribe of Benjamin, forty years.
13:22 And having removed him, he raised (up) David to them as king; this concerning whom he witnessed having said: I found David (the) son of Iesse, a man according to my heart, this (one) who will do all things which I will.'
13:23 And from (the) seed of this (one) God according to a promise brought to Israel a saviour, Jesus.
13:24 Iōannēs having first proclaimed before his entrance a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.
13:25 But Iōannēs having completed his course was saying, Who think ye that I (am)? For I am not (he), but lo, coming after me (is) he whose shoe of his feet I am not worthy to unloose.'
13:26 [The] men, our brethren, [the] sons of (the) race of Abraam, and they who fear God among you, [ye] to whom was sent the word of this salvation.
13:27 For they who dwell in Jerusalem and their rulers also of this were ignorant, and also (of) the voices of the prophets, these which are read on every sabbath, having judged (him), having fulfilled them,
13:28 and having not found any cause of (the) death in him, they asked Pilatos to kill him.
13:29 But having fulfilled all things which were written concerning him, they put him down from the tree (lit. wood), they put him within a sepulchre.
13:30 But God raised him from them who are dead,
13:31 he who manifested himself many days to them who came with him from [the] Galilea into Jerusalem, these now who witness to him unto the people.
13:32 And we (pron.) preach good tidings to you, of the promise which was made to (lit. in) the fathers,
13:33 that God fulfilled this to the children, having raised Jesus; as it is written in the second psalm: Thou art my son, I begat thee to-day.'
13:34 But that he raised him from them who are dead, (and) he will no more return to (the) corruption, He said thus: shall give to you the holy (things) of David which are sure.'
13:35 Therefore again he saith in another place: Thou shalt not give to the holy (one) of thine to see (the) corruption.
13:36 For David indeed in his generation was serving the counsel of God, he fell asleep, and he was laid with his fathers, and he saw (the) corruption:
13:37 but he whom God raised saw not (the) corruption.
13:38 Let the thing then be manifested to you, [the] men, our brethren, that through this (man) is proclaimed to you (the) forgiveness of your sins: and from all the things in which ye could not be justified in (the) law of Mōysēs,
13:39 [but] in this (one) all who believe will be justified.
13:40 See, then, lest by any means that which he said in the prophets come upon you:
13:41 See, [the] despisers, and wonder and turn yourselves, because I shall (lit. will) do a work in your days, a work which ye believe not, if one should declare it to you.'
13:42 But coming forth, they were thinking right that they should speak on the next sabbath.
13:43 But the synagogue having been dismissed, many of the Jews, and they who were devout among the strangers, walked after Paulos and Barnabas (who were) persuading them to abide in the grace of God.
13:44 But on the next sabbath almost the whole city assembled to hear the word of God.
13:45 But the Jews having seen the multitudes, were filled with jealousy, and they were opposing the things which Paulos was saying, (and) blaspheming.
13:46 But Paulos and Barnabas were emboldened, they said: It was necessary to speak to you first the word of God. Since ye cast it away from you, and ye reckon yourselves not to be worthy of the eternal life, lo, we shall (lit. will) turn to the Gentiles.
13:47 For this is as the Lord ordered us: "I put thee for a light of the Gentiles, to be for a salvation unto the end of the earth."'
13:48 But the Gentiles having heard, rejoiced, and they were glorifying the word of God. And all they who were ordained to the eternal life believed.
13:49 But they were going about with the word of the Lord in all the country.
13:50 But the Jews were instigating the devout women, and those of honourable estate, and the first (men) of the city, and they raised a persecution against Paulos and Barnabas, and they cast them away from their boundaries.
13:51 But they (pron.) shook off (the) dust of their feet against (lit. upon) them, they came into Ikonion.
13:52 But the disciples were being full of joy and the holy spirit.
14:1 But it Came to pass in Ikonion according to the same manner that they went into the synagogue of the Jews, and spake thus so that a great multitude believed of the Jews and the Greeks.
14:2 But the Jews who were disobedient arose, and they gave pain to the souls of the Gentiles concerning the brethren.
14:3 They indeed then spent a great time there, speaking openly in (the) name of the Lord. He who witnessed for (the) word of his grace, giving signs and wonders to be done through their hands.
14:4 But the multitude of the city was divided. Some indeed were being with the Jews, but others were being with the apostles.
14:5 But the Gentiles having run with the Jews and their rulers also to insult them and to stone them,
14:6 they having seen, fled into the cities of Lykaonia, Lystra, and Terbē, and the region, round about.
14:7 They were preaching good tidings there.
14:8 And there was a man impotent in his feet in Lystra; he was sitting, being lame since he was in (the) womb of his mother; he walked not ever.
14:9 And this (man) heard Paulos speaking. But he (pron.) having gazed at him, and having known that there was faith in him to be saved,
14:10 he said in a great voice: 'Arise, stand upon thy feet.' And he was springing up, and he was walking.
14:11 The multitudes indeed then having seen that which Paulos did, lifted up their voice in Lykaonian, saying: The gods became as the men, they came down unto us.
14:12 They were calling indeed Barnabas [the] Zeus,' but Paulos Ethel Ermēs,' since he (pron.) was chief of the word.
14:13 But the priest of [the] Zeus, who was being before the city, brought calves and crowns up to the porches, he was wishing to slay, with the multitude.
14:14 But the apostles Barnabas and Paulos having heard, rent their garments, they ran unto the multitude, crying out,
14:15 saying: '[The] men, why do ye these (things)? We also are men, men of passion like you, preaching good tidings to you, to depart from the vanities and to turn to the living God, he who made (the) heaven and (the) earth and the sea, and all things which are in them:
14:16 he who was in the generations which passed (by); he let all the nations walk in their ways.
14:17 And yet he let not himself be without witness, doing good things, he gave to them rains from (the) heaven and fruitbearing times, satiating your hearts with food and delight.'
14:18 And saying these (things) scarcely they caused the multitude to be quiet (so as) not to slay to them.
14:19 But Jews went from (the) Antiochia and Ikonion, they persuaded the multitudes, they stoned Paulos, and they dragged him outside of the city, thinking that he died.
14:20 But as the disciples were around him, having risen, he came into the city. And on the (lit. his) morrow he came forth with Barnabas into Terbē.
14:21 But having preached good tidings in that city, and having taught a great multitude, they returned into Lystra and Ikonion and (the) Antiochia,
14:22 confirming the souls of the disciples, encouraging them to stay in the faith, and that through much tribulation we must go into the kingdom of God.
14:23 But they laid hand upon presbyters for them in every church; and having prayed in fastings, they committed them to the Lord, whom they believed.
14:24 But having passed (through) [the] Pisidia, they came to [the] Pamphylia.
14:25 And having spoken the word in Pergē, they came into Attalia;
14:26 and from there they sailed to (the) Antiochia, the place in which they were given in the grace of God for the work which they completed.
14:27 But having come, and having assembled the church, they were showing to them concerning all things which God did with them; and that he opened a door of (the) faith to the Gentiles.
14:28 But they abode there with the disciples not a little time.
15:1 And some having come from [the] Ioudea, were teaching the brethren, that if ye should not be circumcised according to (the) custom of Mōysēs it is not possible for you to be saved.
15:2 But no little trouble having happened to Paulos and Barnabas and others of thern, they ordained Paulos and Barnabas to go unto the apostles and the presbyters who were in Jerusalem to see concerning this question.
15:3 They (pron.) indeed then having been escorted by the church, passed through [the] Phoinikē and (the) Samaria, speaking concerning (the) return of the Gentiles: and they were making a great joy with all the brethren.
15:4 But having come into Jerusalem, they of the church and the apostles and the presbyters received them; but they showed to them all things which God did with them.
15:5 But some from (the) sect of the Pharisees who believed arose, saying: It is right that they should circumcise them, and to order to keep (the) law of Mōysēs.'
15:6 But the apostles and the presbyters assembled to see concerning this word.
15:7 But a great questioning having happened, Petros stood, he said to them, [The] men, our brethren, ye (pron.) know that since the early days God chose among you from my mouth to cause the Gentiles to hear (the) word of the Gospel, and believe.
15:8 And God, he who knoweth the hearts, witnessed to them, and he gave to them the holy spirit, as he gave to us also;
15:9 and he put not any difference between us and them, having cleansed their hearts in the faith.
15:10 Now then why tempt ye God, to place a yoke on (the) shoulders of the disciples, this which not our fathers nor we (pron.) could bear?
15:11 But through the grace of our Lord Jesus we believe that we shall be saved, according as the others.
15:12 But all the multitude was silent, and they were hearing Barnabas and Paulos speaking of all the signs and the wonders which God did among the Gentiles through them.
15:13 But after they were silent, Iakōbos answered, saying, [The] men, our brethren, hear me:
15:14 Symeōn spake how at first God visited, to take a people from the Gentiles in his name.
15:15 And with this agree the words of the prophets; according as it is written :
15:16 'After these things I shall return, and I shall build the tabernacle of David, which was fallen; and the things which were overturned of it I shall build: and I shall (lit. will) set it up:
15:17 that (the) rest of [the] men may seek for the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name was called, saith the Lord, he who caused these things
15:18 to be manifest since (the) age.
15:19 'Therefore I (pron.) give judgement, not to molest them who will turn from the Gentiles;
15:20 but to send to them, to cause them to depart from things slain for idols, and [the] fornication, and things strangled, and the dead blood (plur.).
15:21 For Mōysēs since the early generations hath them who proclaim him in every city in the synagogues, being read on every sabbath.
15:22 Then it seemed good to the apostles and the presbyters with the whole church to choose men from them, to send them to (the) Antiochia with Paulos and Barnabas; Ioudas, who is called Barsabbas,' and Silas, chief men among the brethren:
15:23 having written through them, The apostles and the presbyters to the brethren who are in (the) Antiochia and [the] Kylikia and [the] Syria, the brethren who are of the Gentiles,
15:24 Since we heard that some from us having come forth troubled you, perverting your souls in words, these which we said not;
15:25 it seemed good then to us, having come together, to choose men to send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paulos,
15:26 Men who gave their soul for (the) name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
15:27 But we sent Ioudas and Silas, they also shall show to you the same things through (the) word.
15:28 For it pleased the holy spirit and us also, not to put more burden upon you except these of necessity.
15:29 Keep yourselves from them, the things slain for idols, and the dead blood (plur.), and things strangled, and [the] fornication; keeping yourselves from these and doing well. Farewell.
15:30 They (pron.) indeed then having been dismissed, came to (the) Antiochia; and having assembled the multitude, they gave the epistle.
15:31 But having read, they rejoiced for the consolation.
15:32 Ioudas and Silas, (who) were prophets also, through many a word consoled the brethren and assured them.
15:33 But having spent some time with them, they were dismissed in [a] peace to go unto them who sent them.
15:34 Omitted
15:35 But Paulos and Barnabas abode in (the) Antiochia, teaching and preaching good tidings, with many others, of the word of God.
15:36 But after some days said Paulos to Barnabas: 'Let us return and visit our brethren in every city, those in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see what happened to them.'
15:37 But Barnabas was wishing to take away Iōannēs also with them, who is called Markos.'
15:38 But Paulos was thinking good that him who separated from them since (the) Pamphylia, and who came not with them to the work, they should not take with them.
15:39 But [an] anger arose, so that they separated from one another; but Barnabas took Markos, he sailed to Kypros;
15:40 but Paulos chose Silas, he came forth, having been delivered to the grace of God by the brethren.
15:41 But he was passing through (the) Syria and (the) Kylikia confirming the churches.
16:1 But he came into (the) Terbē also and Lystra: and lo, a disciple was being there, his name being Timotheos, (the) son of a believing Jewess; but his father was a Greek.
16:2 Concerning this (man) were witnessing the brethren who were in Lystra and Ikonion.
16:3 Him Paul wished to come forth with him; and having taken him away, he circumcised him, because of the Jews who were in that place: for they all were knowing that his father was a Greek.
16:4 But going round among the cities they were delivering to them to keep the decrees which were established by the apostles and the presbyters who were in Jerusalem.
16:5 The churches indeed then were going on (lit. coming) being confirmed in the faith, and they were going on (lit. coming) multiplying in their number daily.
16:6 But they passed through [the] Phrikia and the country of [the] Galatia, the holy spirit having prevented them from speaking the word of God in [the] Asia.
16:7 But having come into the places of [the] Mysia, they were trying to go to [the] Bēthenia; and the spirit of Jesus was not allowing them.
16:8 But having passed from [the] Mysia, they came into Trōas.
16:9 And a vision. was manifested to Paulos in the night; a man of Makedon standing, praying him, saying: 'Come to (the) Makedonia, help us.'
16:10 But when we saw the vision we immediately sought for coming to (the) Makedonia, considering that God called us to preach good tidings to them.
16:11 But having come from Trōas, we went quickly to Samothrakē: but (on) the (lit. his) morrow we came into Neapolis;
16:12 and from there we came to Philippois, which [it] is the first (city) of the district of (the) Makedonia, a colony city: but we were abiding in that city some days
16:13 But on the day of the sabbaths we came outside of the city by the river, the place (of which) we were thinking that there would be [a] prayer there. And having sat, we were speaking to the women who came forth.
16:14 And a woman, her name being Lydia, being a seller of purple, of a city called Thyatērōn, worshipping God, was hearing. This (one) God opened her heart, to attend to the things which Paulos was saying.
16:15 But having been baptised, and her house, she besought us, saying: 'If ye reckoned me faithful to the Lord, come into my house, abide.' And she took us by force.
16:16 But it came to pass (that) as we were going to the prayer a young maidservant, there being a spirit of divination with her, met us, she who was giving much profit to her masters, being (a) diviner.
16:17 She having walked after Paulos and us, was crying out, saying: 'These men are servants of most high God; these who proclaim to you a way of salvation.'
16:18 But this she was doing many days. But Paulos, having been grieved, and having turned to the spirit, said: I order thee in (the) name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.' And he came out in that hour.
16:19 But her masters, having seen that the hope of their profit came out of her, laid hold on Paulos and Silas; they dragged them away to the marketplace unto the rulers.
16:20 And having brought them to the captains, they said: These men trouble our city being Jews:
16:21 and they proclaim to us other customs, these which it is not lawful for us to receive nor to do, being Romans.'
16:22 And the multitude rose upon them; and the captains rent their garments, they commanded that they should beat them with (the) staff.
16:23 Having given to them many stripes, they cast them to the prison, having ordered the jailor a to keep them securely.
16:24 This (man) having received an order of this kind, cast them into the inner prison, and he secured their feet to the wood.
16:25 But at midnight Paulos and Silas, praying, were blessing God: they all his house. who were bound were hearing them:
16:26 suddenly happened a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the place of binding were moved: but immediately all the doors were opened; and all the bands of theirs were loosed.
16:27 But the jailor having woke, and having seen the doors of the prison open, drew his sword, being about to kill himself, thinking that they who were bound fled.
16:28 But Paulos cried out in a great voice, saying: ‘Do not any evil to thyself: for we are all here.'
16:29 But he took a light; he ran in, and having been in a trembling, cast himself down at the feet of Paulos and Silas;
16:30 and having brought them out, he said to them: 'My masters, what ought I to do that I may be saved?
16:31 But they (pron.) said: 'Believe the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house.'
16:32 And they spake to him the word of the Lord, him and all his house.
16:33 And he took them away in that hour of the night, he washed their wounds; and he was baptised, he and
16:34 But baving brought them into his house, he put a table before them, and was being glad and all his house, having believed God.
16:35 But the day having come, the captains sent lictors, saying: 'Release those men.'
16:36 But the jailor showed to Paulos these words: The captains sent that ye should be released: now then come forth, go in [a] peace.'
16:37 But Paulos said to them: Having beaten us publicly, being Roman men, (when) also we are not condemned, they cast us to (the) prison; and they cast us (pron.) out secretly. Nay, but let them come themselves and bring us out.'
16:38 The lictors showed to the captains these words: but they feared, having heard that they were Romans.
16:39 And having come, they entreated them, and having brought them out, they besought them to go out of their city.
16:40 But having come out of the prison, they went into (the) house of Lydia, and having seen, they comforted the brethren, and they came forth.
17:1 Having passed through [the] Amphipolis and [the] Apollōnia, they came to Thessalonikē, the place in which there was a synagogue of the Jews:
17:2 but according to the custom of Paulos, he went in unto them, and he was speaking to them from the Scriptures for three sabbaths,
17:3 manifesting and putting (it) before them, that Christ must suffer and rise from them who are dead, and that Jesus Christ is this, this whom I (pron.) proclaim to you.
17:4 And some indeed from them believed, and there were numbered with Paulos and Silas a great multitude of them who worship of the Greeks, women also of the first (rank) not few.
17:5 But the Jews were jealous, and they took men, evil, of the baser sort, and having assembled a multitude they troubled the city, and they came at (the) house of Iassōn seeking for them that they might bring them out to the multitude.
17:6 But having not found them, they dragged Iassōn out and other brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying out: These are they who troubled the world, and they are present here;
17:7 whom Iassōn received. And all these oppose the decrees of (the) king, saying that there is another king, Jesus.'
17:8 But they troubled the multitude and the rulers of the city hearing these (things).
17:9 And having taken what is right from Iassōn and the rest also, they released them.
17:10 But the brethren immediately escorted Paulos and Silas by night into Beroia: but they (pron.) having come thither, went into the synagogue of the Jews.
17:11 But these were (more) noble than they who were in Thessalonikē: these having received the word in all readiness of heart, (were) searching daily in the Scriptures whether these things were thus.
17:12 Many indeed then from them believed; and some also from the Greeks, women of honourable state, and men also not a few.
17:13 But the Jews of Thessalonike having known that Paulos proclaimed in (the) Beroia also the word of God, came to that place also, moving the multitudes, troubling them.
17:14 Then immediately the brethren escorted Paulos to make him go toward the sea: but Silas and Timotheos were left there.
17:15 But they who escorted Paulos brought him into Athēnnas. And having received commandment to give message to the brethren Silas and Timotheos, that they might come to him quickly, they came forth, they went (away).
17:16 But Paulos was being in Athēnnas looking out for them. But his spirit was angered within him, seeing the city abounding with idolatry.
17:17 He was speaking indeed then in the synagogue to the Jews, and them who worship, and all who assemble daily in the marketplace.
17:18 But some from the Epicurean and the Stoic philosophers were encountering him; and others were saying: 'What wisheth to say this babbler?' But others were saying that he is a proclaimer of strange demons: because he was proclaiming to them Jesus and his resurrection.
17:19 But they laid hold of him, they brought him into the Ariopagos, saying: 'It is possible for us to know what this new doctrine is, which thou speakest.
17:20 Thou bringest strange words into our ears: we wish to know what these (things) are.'
17:21 But all the Athenians and the strangers who came thither were spending their time in nothing, except to speak and hear (a) new thing.
17:22 But Paulos stood in (the) midst of the Ariopagos, he said: [The] men, [the] Athenians, by everything I see [you] that ye are worshippers of demons more (than others).
17:23 For passing by, and having seen the things which ye worship, I found an altar, (and) written upon it, "God whom we know not." Him then whom ye worship, (and) ye know him not, this (one) I (pron.) proclaim to you:
17:24 God who made the world and all things which are in it, this is the Lord of (the) heaven and (the) earth. He was not dwelling in temples formed by hand;
17:25 nor were hands of man wont to serve him, having no nead of anything, he (pron.) it is who giveth (the) life and (the) breath to all:
17:26 having made all nations of [the] men from one, to cause them to dwell upon (the) face of all (the) earth. Having ordained times ordained from (the) first, and the ordinance of their dwelling;
17:27 to cause them to seek for God, that haply they will feel after him and find him, although he is not far from each one of us:
17:28 for we lived in him and we moved and we existed. As some also from the poets which are among you said: "For we (are) his offspring."
17:29 We being an offspring then of God, ought not to cause ourselves to think of gold, or silver, or stone graven by art or imagination of man that God was like to them.
17:30 The times indeed of the ignorance God let (pass) away; but now he proclaimeth to [the] men to cause all to repent in all places:
17:31 according as he established a day, in which he will judge the world in [a] righteousness through the man whom he ordained; having given assurance to all, having raised him from them who are dead.'
17:32 But having heard 'The resurrection of the dead,' some indeed mocked; but others said: We shall hear thee concerning this.
17:33 And thus again Paulos came from their midst.
17:34 But men who believed joined themselves to him; these among whom were being Dionēsios the Ariopagitēs, and a woman, her name being Damaris, and others with them.
18:1 After these (things), having come from Athēnnēs, he came to Korinthos.
18:2 He found a Jew, his name being Akyllas, who was a Pontian in his race, having come immediately from [the] Hytalia, and Priskylla his wife, because Klaudios had commanded to cause all the Jews to depart from Rōmē. He came unto them;
18:3 and he abode with them, because that he was a fellow craftsman of his; and they were working, for they were makers of tents in their craft.
18:4 But they were speaking in the synagogue on every sabbath, and they were persuading the Jews and the Greeks.
18:5 But Silas and Timotheos having come from (the) Makedonia, [but] Paulos was persevering in the word, witnessing to the Jews that Jesus is Christ.
18:6 But they opposing him and blaspheming, he shook out his garments; he said to them: Your blood upon your head; I (pron.) am clean: henceforth I shall go to the Gentiles,'
18:7 And having removed from there, he came to (the) house of one, his name being Titos, this (was) a believer, worshipping God, whose house was adjoining to the synagogue.
18:8 But Krispos, the ruler of the synagogue, believed the Lord with his whole house; and many from the Korinthians hearing were believing and were being baptised.
18:9 But the Lord said to Paulos through a vision in the night: Fear not, but speak, and hold not thy peace:
18:10 because I (pron.) am with thee, and no one shall rise upon thee to give pain to thee: because I have a great people in this city.'
18:11 But he sat a year and six months, teaching among them the word of God.
18:12 But Galiōn being proconsul of [the] Achaia, the Jews came together upon Paulos, and they brought him to the place of the judgement,
18:13 saying: This (man) persuadeth [the] men to worship God contrary to the law.'
18:14 But Paulos being about to open his mouth, Galiōn said to the Jews: 'If there were wrongdoing or wicked villany, O [the] Jews, well: I would bear with you:
18:15 but if they are questions concerning a word and names and your law ye shall take care (of it) yourselves; I (pron.) wish not to be judge of these (things).'
18:16 And he cast them away from the judgement seat.
18:17 But they all laid hold on Sōsthenēs, the ruler of the synagogue; they beat him before the judgement seat. And it was not being a care to Galiōn concerning any of these (things).
18:18 But Paulos having abode yet many days with the brethren, took leave of them; he sailed to (the) Syria, Priskylla being with him and Akyllas; having shorn his head in Konchrees: for he was being in a vow.
18:19 But he came to Ephesos, and he left those there: but he (pron.) having gone into the synagogue was speaking to the Jews.
18:20 But they praying him that he should spend a great time with them, he wished not;
18:21 but he took leave of them, having said: I shall (lit, will) return to you in the will of God.' But he sailed from Ephesos.
18:22 But having come into Kesaria, and having saluted the church, He came into (the) Antiochia.
18:23 And having spent [a] time there, he came forth, passing from place (to place) of the country of [the] Galatia and [the] Phrikia, confirming all the disciples.
18:24 But there was a Jew, his name being Apellēs, being a man of Rakoti in his race, being a notable man, who came to stay at Ephesos; being powerful in the Scriptures.
18:25 This (man) had been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the spirit, he was speaking and he was teaching in [an] accuracy concerning Jesus, only the baptism of Iōannēs being (that) which he knoweth.
18:26 But this (man) began to speak boldly in the synagogue. Priskylla and Akylla having heard him, received him, and they showed to him in [an] accuracy the way of God.
18:27 But he wishing to come forth to [the] Achaia, the brethren incited him, they wrote to the disciples that they should receive him. But this (man) having come, was very profitable to them who believed through the grace.
18:28 He was confuting the Jews in [an] assurance, manifestly showing to them from the Scriptures that Jesus is Christ.
19:1 But it came to pass, Apellēs being in Korinthos, [but] that Paulos having passed by the places which were above, came to Ephesos, and having found disciples,
19:2 he said to them: Did ye receive the holy spirit, having believed ?' But they (pron.) said: But neither heard we even that there is a holy spirit.'
19:3 But he (pron.) said: 'Unto what did they baptise you ?' But they (pron.) said: The baptism of Iōannēs.'
19:4 But Paulos said: `Iōannēs indeed gave baptism in a water of repentance to the people, saying that they should believe him who was coming after him, that is to say, Jesus.'
19:5 But having heard, they were baptised unto (the) name of the Lord Jesus.
19:6 And Paulos having laid hand on them, the holy spirit came upon them. But they were speaking in (the) tongue, and they were prophesying.
19:7 But they (pron.) all were being twelve men.
19:8 But having gone into the synagogue he was speaking boldly three months, speaking and persuading them concerning the kingdom of God.
19:9 But some having become hardhearted, being disobedient, speaking evil of the way before the multitude, he fled from them, having separated the disciples, Speaking daily in the school of Tyrannos.
19:10 But this he was doing two years; so that all who dwelt in [the] Asia heard the word of the Lord, the Jews and the Greeks.
19:11 But God was doing mighty works not few through (the) hands of Paulos:
19:12 so that they took handkerchiefs and aprons from his body and laid them upon those who were sick, and the sicknesses were wont to go from them, and the evil spirits were coming out.
19:13 But some from the Jews who went about as exorcists took in hand to say (the) name of the Lord Jesus over them who (had) the evil spirits upon them, saying: I adjure you by (it) Jesus, whom Paulos proclaimeth.'
19:14 But there were seven sons of one Skeva,' being a Jew, chief priest, doing this.
19:15 The evil spirit answered, he said to them: Jesus I know, and Paulos also I know, but who are ye?'
19:16 And the man with whom the evil spirit (was) threw himself upon them, he mastered them together, he prevailed over them, so that they fled from that house naked with their heads wounded.
19:17 But this became manifested to all the Jews and the Greeks, who dwelt in Ephesos; and a fear came upon them all, and (the) name of the Lord Jesus Christ was going on (lit. coming) being exalted.
19:18 But many (sing.) from them who believed were coming, confessing, and saying their works.
19:19 But many (plur.) among them who were doing curious arts, having brought their books, burnt them before all: and they took count of their prices, having found them being there fifty thousand of silver.
19:20 But thus mightily grew (the) word of the Lord and it prevailed.
19:21 But these (things) having been completed, Paulos purposed in his spirit that, should he pass throughout (the) Makedonia and [the] Achaia, he might go to Jerusalem, having said: 'After my going there, I must see also Rōmō.
19:22 But he sent two to (the) Makedonia among them who serve him, Timotheos and Erastos, but he (pron.) spent a time in [the] Asia.
19:23 But at that time happened no small trouble concerning the way.
19:24 For one, his name being Dimētrios, a silversmith forming silver temples of [the] Artemis, was giving much of work to the craftsmen not few.
19:25 He having assembled these with the workmen also who were occupied with these (things), said: '[The] men, ye know that from this business cometh the getting of gain to us.
19:26 And ye see and ye hear, that not only indeed Ephesos, but almost in all [the] Asia this "Paulos" turned away a great multitude, saying that these are not gods which are made through formings of hand.
19:27 Not only will this trade become to us for a danger to cause us to come to [a] reproof; but the temple also of the great goddess [the] Artemis will be no more reckoned anything, and her greatness will be overthrown, this which all [the] Asia and all the world worshippeth.'
19:28 But having heard these (things), and having been filled with anger, they were crying out, saying: '[The] Artemis of them of Ephesos is great.'
19:29 And the city was filled with trouble: but all ran hurriedly together to the theatre; they carried off Gaios and Aristarchos, being Makedonians, they came on travel with Paulos.
19:30 But Paulos wishing to go into the multitude, the disciples were not letting him.
19:31 But some also from the rulers of [the] Asia, being friends to him, sent to him, beseeching him not to give himself to the theatre.
19:32 Others indeed then were crying out saying another thing: for the assembly was troubled; and the most of them knew not why they were assembled.
19:33 But from the multitude the Jews brought out Alexandros. Alexandros beckoned to them with his hand, wishing to make defence to the multitude.
19:34 But having known that he is a Jew, there arose one shout from all, about two hours, crying out: [The] Artemis of them of Ephesos is great.'
19:35 But the town clerk having caused the multitude to be quiet, said: [The] men, [the] Ephesians, [for] who among [the] men (is there) who knoweth not (the) city of the Ephesians, that it is temple-keeper of the great Artemis and the Diopetēs?
19:36 No one them opposeth these (things). It is worthy then that ye should be sedate and do not anything lightly.
19:37 For ye brought these men hither, neither are they temple-robbers, nor do they blaspheme your gods.
19:38 If then Dimētrios and the craftsmen also who are with him have a word against any one, the law courts will be held, and there is (a) proconsul, let them implead one another.
19:39 But if ye seek for another Matthewter, in the regular assembly it shall be decided.
19:40 For we are even in danger to be accused concerning the trouble of to-day, there being no pretext with which it is possible for us to give account for the trouble.'
19:41 And having said these (things), he dismissed the assembly.
20:1 But after the trouble was ended, Paulos sent for the disciples and comforted them, he saluted them, he came forth to go to (the) Makedonia.
20:2 Having passed through that place and having comforted them in many a word, he came to [the] Elias.
20:3 But having spent three months there, an evil plan was made concerning him by the Jews. Being about to come to (the) Syria, a plan was made to return through (the) Makedonia.
20:4 But Sōsipatros of Pyrrus the man of Beroia was with him; but (of) them of Thessalonikē, Aristarchus and Sekounthos; and Gaios the man of Terbē, and Timotheos; but they of [the] Asia, Tyehikos and Trophēmus.
20:5 But these having been before us, stayed for us in Troas.
20:6 But we (pron.) after the days of the unleavened (plur.) sailed from Philippois, and we came unto them to Trōas in five (days), and we abode there with them seven days.
20:7 But on (the) first (lit. one) of the sabbaths, we having assembled to break [a] bread, Paulos was speaking to them, being about to come forth on the (lit. his) morrow; but he was spreading out the word unto midnight.
20:8 But there were many lamps in the upper place, the place in which they were being assembled.
20:9 But a young man was sitting, his name being Eutychos, upon the window, forgetting (himself) in a deep (lit. great) sleep; but as Paulos was speaking, the sleep overcame him more, he fell down from the third storey, and he was taken up dead
20:10 But Paulos came down, he threw himself upon him, and having embraeed him, he said: Trouble not; for his life (is) in him.'
20:11 But having gone up, and having broken the bread, and having tasted, he prolonged the word until (the) light came forth, and thus he came forth.
20:12 But they brought the boy alive, and they received no little consolation.
20:13 But we (pron.) went before on board the ship, we came into Assos arranging to take in Paulos at that place: for he had ordered us thus, being about to walk on foot.
20:14 But having met with us in Assos, we took him in, we came to Militinē.
20:15 But on the morrow we sailed from there, we came opposite Chios, but in the evening we came to Samos; afterwards we came to Milētos.
20:16 For Paulos had ordained to sail past Ephesos, that he might not delay in [the] Asia, for he was hasting, that, if it were possible, he might spend (the) day of the Pentēcostē in Jerusalem.
20:17 But from Milētos he sent to Ephesos, he called the presbyters of the church.
20:18 But they having come unto him, he said to them: Ye (pron.) know, since the first day (in) which I came to [the] Asia, in what manner I was with you in all this time;
20:19 being servant to the Lord in all humbleness of heart, and tears, and the trials which came upon me, in the evil plans of the Jews:
20:20 how I hid not anything of the things which were profitable, without showing them to you, and teaching you,
20:21 witnessing publicly and in every house to the Jews and the Greeks [the] repentance toward God, and the faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
20:22 And now, lo, I (pron.) being bound in the spirit shall (lit. will) go to Jerusalem, I know not that which will befall me in it.
20:23 Except that the holy spirit witnesseth to me in every city, saying: "Bonds and afflictions stay for thee."
20:24 But my life I put it not, that it is precious to me, in any account, until I complete my course and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to witness to the Gospel of the grace of God.
20:25 And now, lo, I (pron.) know that ye see my face no more, all ye, they among whom I was passing, proclaiming the kingdom of God.
20:26 Therefore, I witness to you in this very day that I (pron.) am pure from the blood of you all.
20:27 For I hid not myself so as not to show to you (the) whole wish of God.
20:28 Take heed to yourselves and all the flock, in which the holy spirit put you as overseers, to feed the church of the Lord, which he got through his own blood.
20:29 But I (pron.) know that after my going (away) grievous wolves will come in to you, they will not spare the flock;
20:30 and men will rise from among you, saying perverse words, for them to draw the disciples after them.
20:31 Therefore then watch yourselves, remembering that I spent three years, I ceased not by the day and the night admonishing each one of you in tears.
20:32 And now I commit you to the Lord and (the) word of his grace, for which it is possible to establish and to give inheritance among all them who were sanctified.
20:33 [A] silver or [a] gold or a garment I coveted not them of any one.
20:34 Ye (pron.) know that these my hands ministered to my need, and (to) them who were with me.
20:35 I showed to you all things, that it is right to toil thus and help them who are weak, and for you to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he (pron.) said: "It is a blessedness rather to give than to receive."'
20:36 And having said these (things), he threw himself on his knees with them all; they prayed.
20:37 But there was a great weeping of all of them; and they threw themselves upon (the) neck of Paulos, and they kissed his mouth,
20:38 grieving most concerning the word which he said, that they will see his (lit. my) face no more. But they were escorting him toward the ship.
21:1 But it came to pass (that) having put to sea, we separated from them, we sailed with straight courses, we came into Kō; but on the (lit. his) morrow we came to Rodos, and from there we came to Patara
21:2 and having found a ship being about to cross over to [the] Phoinikē, we went on board; we put off.
21:3 But having seen Kypros, we left it on the left hand, we sailed to (the) Syria, and we came to Tyros: For the ship was being about to unlade its freight there.
21:4 But having found the disciples, we abode there with them seven days, these who were saying to Paulos through the spirit not to go into Jerusalem.
21:5 But it came to pass (that) having completed the days, we came forth, we walked (away), all of them escorting us, with women also and their children, unto outside of the city: and we threw ourselves upon our knees upon the shore, we prayed,
21:6 and we took leave from one another, we went on board the ship, but they returned to their own.
21:7 But we (pron.) sailed from Tyros, we came into Ptolemais, and having saluted the brethren, we abode with them a day.
21:8 But on the (lit. his) morrow having come forth, we came to Kesaria, and having gone into (the) house of Philippos the preacher of good tidings, being one from the seven, we abode with him.
21:9 But this (man) had four daughters, virgins, prophesying.
21:10 But we having abode there many days, One came from [the] Ioudea, being a prophet, his name being Agabos.
21:11 And having come unto us, he took away the girdle of Paulos, he bound his hands and his feet, he said: These (things) are they which the holy spirit saith: "The man, whose is this girdle, the Jews will thus bind in Jerusalem, and will deliver him to (the) hands of Gentiles."'
21:12 But we having heard these (things), were beseeching, we and the brethren of that place, for him not to go to Jerusalem.
21:13 Then answered Paulos: 'What do ye, weeping and paining my heart? For not only to be bound, but I (pron.) am prepared to die in Jerusalem for (the) name of the Lord Jesus.'
21:14 But he having not been persuaded, we held our peace, saying: Let the will of the Lord be done.'
21:15 But after these days having prepared ourselves, we were going to Jerusalem.
21:16 But some from the disciples came with us from Kesaria, having brought him with whom we should (lit. will) lodge, one 'Nassōn,' a Kyprian, an early disciple.
21:17 But having come into Jerusalem, the brethren received us in [a] joy.
21:18 But on the (lit. his) morrow Paulos came with us unto Iakōbos; but all the presbyters came to him.
21:19 And having saluted them, he was narrating to them one by one the things which God did among the Gentiles through his ministry.
21:20 But they (pron.) having heard, glorified God. But they said to him: 'Thou seest, our brother, how many ten thousands there are from the Jews who believed; and all are zealots for the law:
21:21 but they were shown concerning thee, that thou teachest the Jews who are among the Gentiles to depart from Moses, saying: "Circumcise not your children, nor walk according to the customs.
21:22 What, then? They will certainly hear that thou camest.
21:23 This then do which we shall (lit. will) say to thee." We have four men who have a vow to be paid;
21:24 take these, purify thyself with them, and pay expense for them, that they may shave their head: and all shall know that the things which were said concerning thee are nothing; but that thou also agreest to keep the law.
21:25 But concerning the Gentiles who believed, we (pron.) sent, having judged to cause them to keep. themselves from the things slain to idols, and the blood (plur.), and the things strangled, and the fornication.'
21:26 Then Paulos- took the men; on the day which cometh he purified himself with them; he went into the temple, manifesting the completion of the days of the purification, until they brought the offering of each one of them for each one.
21:27 But the seven days being about to be completed, the Jews of [the] Asia, having seen him being in the temple, troubled all the multitude, and they laid their hands upon him,
21:28 saying: '[The] men, [the] Israelites, help. This is the man who opposeth the people and the law and this place, teaching all in every place: but further also having brought Greeks into the temple, [and] he defiled the holy place.'
21:29 For they had before seen Trophēmos with him in the city, the Ephesian; this (man) they were thinking that Paulos took away into the temple.
21:30 But the whole city was moved, and there happened a running together of all the people; and having overpowered Paulos, they drew him out of the temple, and immediately the doors were shut.
21:31 But as they are seeking to kill him, The news went up to the chiliarchos of the band, that the whole of Jerusalem was troubled.
21:32 But immediately he took soldiers and centurions, he ran upon them. But they (pron.) having seen the soldiers and the chiliarchos, ceased beating Paulos.
21:33 Then the chiliarchos having approached, laid hold on him, and he commanded him to be bound with two chains; and he was asking who he is, and what he did.
21:34 But others were crying out saying another thing. But having not been able to know the certainty because of the tumult, he commanded to take him away into the castle.
21:35 But when he was mounting the stairs, it came to pass that the soldiers carried him because of (the) violence of the multitude;
21:36 for the multitude of the people were walking after him, crying out: Take him away there.'
21:37 But as they are about to bring him into the castle, Paulos said to the chiliarehos: 'Is it lawful for me to say anything to thee?' But he (pron.) said to him: Knowest thou indeed Greek?
21:38 Art thou not then the man of Chērni who before these days madest tumults, and thou tookest four thousand men of the Assassins out to (the) desert?'
21:39 But Paulos said to him: 'I indeed (am) a man, Jew, a man of Tarsos, of [the] Kylikia, a citizen of a city which is not inconspicuous: I pray thee then to command me that I may speak to this people.'
21:40 But he having commanded him, Paulos standing upon the stairs waved his hand against the people; but a great silence having been made, he cried out in the language of Hebrew, saying:
22:1 [The] men, [the] brethren, and [the] fathers, hear my defence which is mine unto you now.'
22:2 But having heard that he answered them in the language of Hebrew, [but] they held their peace the more. And he said:
22:3 'I indeed am a man, Jew, I was born in Tarsos of [the] Kylikia, having been brought up in this city, at (the) feet of Gamaliēl he who taught me accurately (the) law of our fathers, I being a zealot for God according as all ye (pron.) also are being to-day,
22:4 having persecuted this way even unto (the) death. Binding men and women, casting them to (the) prison.
22:5 As the chief priest witnesseth to me, and all the presbyters: from whom having received epistle unto the brethren, [But] I was going to Damaskos, to bring others who were there bound into Jerusalem, that they might give pain to them.
22:6 But it happened, that as (I was) walking and having approached Damaskos about midday, suddenly shone upon me a great light from (the) heaven.
22:7 But I fell down, and I heard a voice saying to me: "Saoul, Saoul, why persecutest thou me?"
22:8 But I (pron.) answered: "Who (art) thou, Lord?" But he said to me: "I am Jesus the Nazōreos, he whom thou (pron.) persecutest."
22:9 But they who were being with me were seeing indeed the light, but they heard not (the) voice of him who spake to me.
22:10 But I said: "What shall (lit. will) I do, Lord?" But the Lord said to me: "Rise, go into Damaskos; and it will be spoken to thee there concerning all things which were ordained for thee to do."
22:11 But it came to pass, that as I saw not for (the) glory of that light, they who were with me laid hold of my hand; I came to Damaskos.
22:12 But one, called Ananias, a man devout according to the law, all the Jews who dwelt there witnessing to him,
22:13 [but] having come unto me, and having stood, he said to me: "Saoul, my brother, see." But I also in that hour gazed at him.
22:14 But he (pron.) said: "God of our fathers chose thee before to know his will, and to see the righteous (one), and to hear a voice from his mouth.
22:15 Because thou wilt be for him witness with all men concerning the things which thou sawest and which thou heardest.
22:16 And now what wilt thou do? Rise, be baptised and wash thee from thy sins, praying to his name."
22:17 But it came to pass (that) having returned to Jerusalem, and praying in the temple, I was in a trance;
22:18 I saw him saying to me: "Come quickly from Jerusalem, because they will not receive witness from thee concerning me."
22:19 I also said: "Lord, they (pron.) know that I was casting to (the) prison, and I was beating in (every) synagogue them who believed thee:
22:20 and when they were about to shed (the) blood of Stephanos the martyr I also was standing, consenting, and I was keeping the garments of them who were killing him."
22:21 And he said to me: "Go (lit. walk): because I (pron.) will send thee to distant Gentiles."'
22:22 But they were hearing him unto this word; and they lifted up their voice, saying: 'Take away such an one from (the) earth: for he is not worthy of living.'
22:23 But (as they are) crying out, and throwing (off) their garments, and throwing dust to the air,
22:24 the chiliarchos commanded them to take him into the castle, having told them to give pain to him with scourges, that he might know concerning what cause they cry out thus upon him.
22:25 But when they strained him in the thongs, Paulos said to the centurion who was standing (by): 'A man, Roman, not even condemned, it is lawful for you to scourge him.'
22:26 But the centurion having heard, went unto the chiliarchos, he showed to him, saying: What wilt thou do? For the man is a Roman.'
22:27 But the chiliarchos came unto him; he said to him: Say to me that thou (art) a Roman.' But he (pron.) said: Yea.'
22:28 The chiliarchos answered: I (pron.) bought this citizenship for me with a great sum.' But Paulos said: I (am one) who was born in it.'
22:29 Immediately then they departed from him who give pain to him: and the chiliarchos feared, having known that he was a Roman, and that he bound him.
22:30 But on the (lit. his) morrow, wishing to know the certainty why the Jews accused him, he loosed him, and he commanded to come the chief priests and all the council, and he brought hullos down, he set him among them.
23:1 But Paulos having gazed at the council, said, [The] men, our brethren, in all good (plur.) conscience I (pron.) lived before God up to this day.
23:2 But the chief priest Ananias commanded them who stood by him to strike on his mouth.
23:3 Then said Paulos to him: God will strike thee thus, [the] wall which is smeared with white; thou sittest even judging me according to the law, and thou commandest to strike me contrary to the law.'
23:4 But they who stood (by) said: 'Thou reviledst the chief priest of God.'
23:5 But Paulos said: I was not knowing, my brethren, that he is chief priest: for it is written, "A ruler of thy people thou shalt not say evil against."'
23:6 But Paulos having known that there is a part (of them) indeed belonging to the Sadducees, but the other part belonging to the Pharisees, he cried out in the council, [The] men, our brethren, I (am) a Pharisee; concerning a hope and a resurrection of the dead I (pron.) am judged.
23:7 But he having said this, there happened a tumult between the Pharisees and the Sudducees: and the multitude was divided.
23:8 For the Sadducees indeed say that there is not resurrection, nor angel, 'nor spirit, but the Pharisees confess them both.
23:9 But a great noise happened, and some from the Pharisees rose, they disputed, saying: We find nothing of evil in this man. If a spirit spake to him or an angel.'
23:10 But a great tumult having happened, the chiliarchos feared lest by any means Paulos should be carried (off) by them, he commanded the soldiery that they should go up and snatch him from their midst, and bring him into the castle.
23:11 But in the night which cometh the Lord stood by him, he said: 'Take courage; as thou witnessed concerning me in Jerusalem, thus thou must also witness concerning me in Rōmē.'
23:12 But the day having come, the Jewsassembled, they adjured themselves, saying (that they would) not eat nor drink until they killed Paulos.
23:13 But they were being more than forty men, they who made this oath.
23:14 These came unto the chief priests and the presbyters, they said: an anathema we adjured ourselves not to taste anything until we kill Paulos:
23:15 now then make known to the chiliarchos, with the council, that he may bring him unto you as that ye may know accurately concerning him: but we (prom) before that he approacheth you, are prepared to kill him.'
23:16 But (the) son of (the) sister of Paulos having heard of the plot, he came, he went in to the castle, he showed to Paulos.
23:17 But Paulos called one of the centurions, he said: Take this young man in unto the chiliarchos; for he hath a thing to say to him.'
23:18 He (pron.) indeed then took him; he brought him unto the chiliarchos, and he said: The prisoner Paulos called me, he told me, To bring this young man in unto thee, having a thing to say to thee.'
23:19 But the chiliarchos seized hold of his hand, and having withdrawn apart alone, he was asking him: What (is) it which thou wishest to say to me?'
23:20 But he said: The Jews settled to pray thee to-morrow, that thou should bring Paulos to the council, as thou wilt know concerning him accurately.
23:21 Thou then be not persuaded by them: for there are more than forty men from them lying in wait for him; these who adjured one another not to eat nor to drink until they kill him: and now they are prepared, looking out for the promise about to be from thee.'
23:22 The chiliarchos then dismissed the young man, having ordered him not to say to any one that thou showedst to me these (things).
23:23 And he called two from the centurions; he said to them: 'Prepare two hundred soldiers, that they may go unto Kesaria, and seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen, from (the) third hour of the night,
23:24 and may take beasts also, that they may mount Paulos, and bring him safe unto Phylix the governor.'
23:25 But he wrote a letter having a form thus,
23:26 Klaudios Lysia to the most excellent governor Phylix, hail.
23:27 This man the Jews seized, and as they are thinking to kill him, I went with the soldiery; . I saved him, having known that he is a Roman.
23:28 But wishing to know the cause concerning which they found fault with him, I brought him to their council:
23:29 whom I found found fault with concerning questions of their law, but I found not sin in him worthy of (the) death or bonds for an offence.
23:30 But having been shown concerning an evil plan which would be made against this man by them, immediately I sent him to thee, having ordered his accusers to speak with thee.
23:31 The soldiers indeed then, according to that which was ordained them, took away Paulos by night, having brought him to Antipatris.
23:32 But on the (lit. his) morrow they let the horsemen go with him; they returned to the castle.
23:33 But those (lit. these) having come to Kesaria, and having given the epistle to the governor, they presented Paulos also to him.
23:34 But he having read the letter, asked from what province he is; and having known that he is from [the] Kylikia,
23:35 I shall hear thee, he said, whenever should come thine accusers: and he commanded to keep him in the pretōrion of Ērōdēs.
24:1 But after five days came up the chief priest Ananias with presbyters, and also an orator, called Tertyllos: these having come, made known to the governor against Paulos.
24:2 But he having been called, Tertyllos began to accuse him, saying, Abundant peace happens through thee, and establishment (plur.) is happening to this nation through thy providence
24:3 on all sides, and in all places, we accept thee, most excellent Phylix, in all thanksgiving.
24:4 But that I may not hinder thee the more, I pray thee to hear me concisely in thy fairness.
24:5 For we found this pestilent man, moving troubles to all the Jews who are in the world, being (a) first (man) for (the) sect of the Nazōreos:
24:6 who tried to defile the temple even: and we laid hold on him.
24:7 Omitted
24:8 This (man) from whom it is possible for thee thyself to know, shouldest thou examine him concerning these things in which we accuse him.
24:9 The Jews added their word that these things were thus.
24:10 Paulos answered, the governor having beckoned to him to speak, Knowing thee since many years being judge to this nation, I shall (lit. will) answer in delight of heart for myself.
24:11 It being possible for thee to know, that not more than twelve days have passed since I went into Jerusalem to worship;
24:12 Neither found they me in the temple speaking to (any) one, nor troubling a multitude, nor in the synagogues, nor in city.
24:13 Nor is it possible for them to establish these (things), these of which they accuse me now.
24:14 But I confess this to thee, that according to this way which these say that (it is a) sect, I worship thus (the) God of my fathers, believing all the things which are written in the law and the prophets:
24:15 Having a hope toward God, which these also look out for, the resurrection about to be for the just and the wrongdoers.
24:16 In this I shall (lit. will) exercise (myself) also for there to be to me a conscience offenceless before God and before [the] men always.
24:17 But after (lit. from) many years I came to do alms to my nation, and offerings:
24:18 these in which they found me purified in the temple, not with a multitude nor with a tumult:
24:19 but certain Jews from [the] Asia, they (lit. these) who ought to have come before thee and accuse, If they have a thing against me.
24:20 Otherwise let these themselves say what wrongdoing they found in me, standing in the council,
24:21 (other) than concerning this one saying, this which I cried out among them standing, Concerning (the) resurrection of the dead. I (pron.) am judged to-day before you.'
24:22 But Phylix put them off, knowing accurately concerning them of the way, having said: 'If Lysias the chiliarchos should come up, I shall know concerning you.'
24:23 And he (part.) commanded the centurion who kept him, [but] to give indulgence to him, and not to hinder any of his friends from ministering to him.
24:24 But after some days Phylix came with Drousilla his wife being a Jewess; he sent for Paulos, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus,
24:25 speaking to him concerning [the] righteousness, and [the] temperance, and the judgement which will be: but Phylix having been in [a] fear answered: Go away, now; but should I have (lit, take) a time, I shall (lit. will) send for thee.'
24:26 But withal he was hoping that Paulos will give money (plug.) to him; and thus that he might release him. Therefore he was sending for him many times, speaking to him.
24:27 But two years having been completed, Phylix received a successor, Porkios Phēstos; but Phylix, wishing to give a favour to the Jews, left Paulos bound.
25:1 Phēstos then having come to the province, after three days went into Jerusalem from Kesaria.
25:2 The chief priests and the first (men) of the Jews made known to him concerning Paulos, and they were beseeching him,
25:3 asking a favour against him, that he might send for him to bring him into Jerusalem; laying wait to kill him on the way.
25:4 Phestos then answered, that Paulos is kept in Kesaria, but he (pron.) is thinking to go thither quickly.
25:5 They then, he said, for whom it is possible among you, let them come down with me; if there is an evil thing in this man, let them accuse him.
25:6 But having been among them not more than eight days or ten, he came to Kesaria. But on the (lit. his) morrow he sat on the judgement seat, he commanded to bring Paulos.
25:7 But he having come, the Jews stood against him, having come down from Jerusalem, bringing many heavy charges upon him, these which they could not establish,
25:8 Paulos defending himself: 'Neither sinned I against (the) law of the Jews, nor the temple, nor (the) king.'
25:9 But Phēstos, wishing to be gracious to the Jews, answered; he said to Paulos: Wishest thou to go to Jerusalem to be judged there with them concerning these (things)?'
25:10 But Paulos said: I stand at the judgement seat of (the) king, the place in which I ought to be judged: but to the Jews I did not any wrong, as thou also knowest perfectly.
25:11 If then I do wrong, and if I did any work worthy of (the) death, then I refuse not to die. But if there is not anything in the things which these accuse me, it is not possible for any to grant me to them, I appeal to (the) king.'
25:12 Then Phēstos spake to the council; he answered, Thou appealedst to (the) king, thou shalt go unto (the) king.
25:13 But some days having passed, Agrippas (the) king and Bernike came to stay at Kesaria; they saluted Phēstos.
25:14 But having spent many days there, Phēstos laid (the) Matthewter of Paulos before (the) king, saying: There is a man bound, having been left by Phylix:
25:15 but I having gone into Jerusalem, the chief priests and the presbyters of the Jews spoke openly (of him), asking against him a sentence.
25:16 But I responded to them, saying that it is not a custom of the Romans to give up a man, before that the accusers stand before him whom they accuse, and he find place of giving his defence concerning the fault.
25:17 They having come then with me to this place, I made not any delay; but on the (lit. his) morrow I sat on the judgement seat, I commanded to bring the man.
25:18 And this (man), the accusers having stood against him, were bringing no pretexts among those of which I (pron.) think that they are evil;
25:19 questions then they had between them and him concerning a doctrine of demons of theirs, and concerning one, called Jesus, who died, this (man) whom Paulos was saying that he is alive.
25:20 But I (pron.) was being amazed concerning these questions of these (things); I was saying: Wilt thou go to Jerusalem, and be judged there concerning these (things)?
25:21 Paulos having appealed to (the) king I kept him for (the) knowledge of (the) king, I commanded to keep him until I send him to (the) king.
25:22 But Agrippas said to Phēstos: I was wishing also to hear the man.' [For] tomorrow, he said, thou shalt hear him.
25:23 On the (lit. his) morrow then, Agrippa having come and Bernikē, with a great pomp, and they having gone into the place of audience, with chiliarchs and great men of the city, and Phestos having commanded, they brought Paul.
25:24 And Phestos said: '(The) king Agrippa and all the men who are with us, ye see this (man): concerning him all the multitude of the Jews pleaded with me in Jerusalem and in this place also, crying out that he is not worthy to live any longer.
25:25 But I (pron.) knew him, that he did not anything worthy of (the) death: but he himself having appealed to (the) king, I decided to send him.
25:26 Concerning whom there is not that which I shall (lit. will) write of certainty to my lord (the) king, Therefore I brought him before you, and especially before thee, (the) king Agrippa, that thou having enquired of him, I might find that which I shall (lit. will) write.
25:27 For I think that it is a thing unreasonable to send the prisoner (and) not to signify his charges also which concern him.'
26:1 But Agrippas said to Paulos: Thou art commanded to speak for thyself.' Then Paulos stretched out his hand, he made defence
26:2 concerning all things with which the Jews find fault with him to (the) king Agrippa, I think that I (am) happy, being about to make defence to-day before thee:
26:3 especially as thou knowest the customs of the Jews and their questions: therefore I pray thee to hear me longsufferingly.
26:4 My living from my youth, which was from (the) beginning among my nation in Jerusalem, all the Jews know;
26:5 knowing me before from (this time) upward, should they wish to witness, That according to the sect which is strict of our service I lived as Pharisee.
26:6 And now concerning (the) hope of the promise which was made to our fathers by God I stand being judged,
26:7 that is to say this hope (as to) which the twelve tribes were serving continually in the day and the night, wishing to attain unto it. Concerning this hope, (the) king, the Jews find fault with me.
26:8 Why is it incredible, judge in yourselves, if God will raise the dead?
26:9 I indeed then was thinking for myself to do many things which oppose (the) name of Jesus the Nazōreos.
26:10 This which I did in Jerusalem; many among the saints I (pron.) cast into the prisons, having received the authority from the chief priests; (as) they were killing them I gave vote against them
26:11 in every synagogue; giving pain to them many times, I was forcing them to blaspheme; but in [an] excess being in a madness towards them, I persecuted them even unto the cities also which are outside.
26:12 And in these (things) journeying to Damaskos with an authority and commandment of the chief priests,
26:13 [but] being on the road at midday I saw, (the) king, a light from (the) heaven brighter than (the) sun, it came upon me and them who were with me.
26:14 But we all having fallen upon the earth, I heard a voice saying to me in the language of Hebrew: Saoul, Saoul, why persecutest thou me? It is a hard thing for thee to kick against goads.'
26:15 But I (pron.) said: Who (art) thou, Lord?' But the Lord said to me: I am Jesus, whom thou (pron.) persccutest.
26:16 But rise, stand upon thy feet. For therefore I manifested myself to thee, to choose thee as an officer for me, and that thou mayest witness to the things which thou sawest, those in which I shall (lit. will) manifest myself to thee;
26:17 I shall save thee from the people and from the Gentiles, those to whom I (pron.) shall (lit. will) send thee,
26:18 to open their eyes, to cause them to return from (the) darkness into (the) light, and from (the) authority of Satan to God, to cause them to receive (the) forgiveness of their sins, and an inheritance among them who are sanctified in the faith of me.'
26:19 Therefore, (the) king Agrippa, I could not be disobedient to the vision of (the) heaven:
26:20 but to them who were in Damaskos first and Jerusalem, and all (the) country of [the] Ioudea, and the Gentiles, I proclaimed to cause them to repent and to cause them to return to God, to do works worthy of the repentance.
26:21 Therefore the Jews laid hold on one in the temple, they were trying to lay (lit. bring) their hand upon me.
26:22 But having received a help from God, I stood until to-day, witnessing to [a] small and [a] great, not saying anything except those which the prophets say and Mōysēs, that they will happen:
26:23 If Christ is a sufferer, if he is first from (the) resurrection of the dead, he will proclaim a light to the people and the Gentiles.
26:24 As he is saying these (things), Phēstos said in a great voice: Thou wast mad, O Paul, the much learning (lit. of writing) caused thee to be mad.'
26:25 But Paulos said: I am not mad, most excellent Phestos; but words of [the] truth and [the] piety (are) those which I say.
26:26 For the king also knoweth concerning these things, to whom I am bold (in) speaking; for I am persuaded that none of these (things) escape his notice; for this was not done in a corner.
26:27 Thou believest, (the) king Agrippas, the prophets; I know that thou believest.'
26:28 But Agrippas said to Paulos: '(With) even a little thou wilt persuade me to make myself Chrēstianos.'
26:29 But Paulos said: I pray to God both in [a] little and (next) in [a] great, not only thou, but also all who hear me to-day for them to become in my manner, in the manner in which I also am, save my bonds.'
26:30 But (the) king rose, and the governor and Bernikē and they who sat with them:
26:31 and having withdrawn, they were speaking to one another, saying: This man doeth not any deed worthy of (the) death or bonds.'
26:32 But Agrippas said to Phēstos: It was possible to release this man, if he had not appealed to (the) king.'
27:1 But it came to pass (that), it having been decided for us to sail to [the] Hytalia, he delivered Paulos and other prisoners to a centurion, his name being Ioulios, from the band of Sabastē.
27:2 But we went on board a ship Andramantinean, about to sail to the places of [the] Asia, we put to sea, being with us Aristarchos also of (the) Makedonia, the native of Thessalonikē.
27:3 But on the (lit. his) morrow we came to (the) Sydōn. But Ioulios did [a] kindness with Paulos; he commanded him to go unto his friends, that they might take care of him.
27:4 And having put to sea from there, we sailed along Kypros, because that the wind was opposing us.
27:5 But having sailed away to the sea which is between Kypros and [the] Pamphylia, we came to Lystra of [the] Kylikia.
27:6 And the centurim found a ship there of Rakoti, about to sail to [the] Hytalia; he placed us on it.
27:7 But having delayed in sailing many days, and having scarcely come off Chnidos, the wind not letting us, [but] we sailed along [the] Krētē off Salmonē;
27:8 having scarcely left it, we came to a place called the good harbours'; [but] a city called Lasea was being near to them.
27:9 But great time having passed, and already it was no longer (the) time of sailing, for the ship had gone out of her course, because that the fast also had passed. But Paulos was exhorting,
27:10 saying to them, [The] men, I see that an injury and much loss will happen, not only of the ship and the freight, but also our lives, in this voyage.
27:11 But the centurion was trusting to the steersman and the shipowner rather than the things which Paulos was saying.
27:12 But the harbour not being (well) placed for us to winter in, most of them made a plan to put out from there, that perhaps they could reach Phoinix to winter in, harbour of [the] Krētē, looking westward, being a place of Chōra.
27:13 But a south wind blowing, they were thinking that they will be able to establish their purpose a, they put to sea from Asses, they left [the] Krētē.
27:14 But a high wind, which is called 'Eurakylōn,' delayed not, it blew against us.
27:15 But it having carried off the ship, as they could not oppose the wind, we gave up, we were driven.
27:16 But having fled to an island which is called Klauda,' scarcely could we secure the boat:
27:17 this having been taken away, they were making help, girding the ship; but fearing lest by any means they should fall into the Sirtēs, we lowered the gear, and thus we floated along.
27:18 But as a tossing was rocking us exceedingly, [but] on the (lit. his) morrow they were tossing out (the freight):
27:19 and on the third day they put (lit. cast) their hand on the gear (plur.) of the ship, they threw them out.
27:20 But as appear not (the) sun and the stars for many days, no small tempest being that which was happening, at length all our hope for us to be saved had gone.
27:21 But a long (time of) not eating happens. Then stood Paulos in their midst, he said: Ye ought indeed, O [the] men having obeyed me, not to have put to sea from [the] Krētē and gain this injury and this loss.
27:22 And now again I entreat you, be longsuffering, for one life from you will not be lost except only the ship.
27:23 For stood by me in this night an angel of God, whose I am, and I worship him,
27:24 saying: "Fear not, O Paulos, thou must be set before (the) king: and lo, all they who sail with thee I granted them to thee."
27:25 Therefore, [the] men, be glad of heart, for I believe God, that it (lit. they) will be as it was spoken to me.
27:26 For we must come upon an island.
27:27 But fourteen nights having passed, we are rolling among the waves in the Andrias.' But at midnight [but] the sailors were thinking that they approached a country:
27:28 and having thrown down the sounding line, they found twenty fathoms of water. But having done a short distance, they threw the sounding line down, they found fifteen fathoms.
27:29 But fearing lest by any means we should fall on reefs, they cast four anchors at the stern of the ship, they were praying for it to be the day.
27:30 But the sailors, seeking that they might flee from the ship, let down the boat to the sea in pretence as that they are going to cast anchors from the fore(ship).
27:31 Paulos said to the centurion and the soldiers, Unless these stay on the ship it is not possible for you to be saved.
27:32 Then the soldiers broke away the ropes of the boat, they let her fall.
27:33 Until the day came, Paulos was persuading them all that they should take some food, saying: Lo, fourteen days ye completed, looking out, ye ate not anything.
27:34 Therefore I pray you to take your food: for this is (the) first (thing) unto your health; for a hair of (the) head of one of you will not perish.'
27:35 But having said these (things), he took a loaf, he gave thanks to God before all, and having broken it, he began to eat.
27:36 But the heart of all of them having been glad, they also took their food.
27:37 But all the souls who were being in the ship were making two hundred (and) seventy-six.
27:38 But having been satisfied with the food, they were causing the ship to lighten, throwing the wheat to the sea.
27:39 But when the day came, they knew not the land; but they were observing a bay, having (lit. being) a shore in it: but they were considering that perhaps they would be able to save the ship thither.
27:40 And having lifted the anchors, they were letting them (go) in the sea, but at the same time they loosed the heads of the rudders; and having hoisted the foresail to the wind which blew, they put in to the shore.
27:41 But having fallen on a place, being of two seas, they ran the ship aground thither; and the fore(part) of it indeed was fixed, it stayed, not moving, but the hinder (part) of it was destroyed by (the) violence of the waves.
27:42 But the soldiers made a plan, that they should kill the prisoners, lest by any means one should swim and flee.
27:43 But the centurion, wishing to save Paulos, hiddered them from doing their plan: But he commanded those for whom it was possible that they should support themselves on the sea, and swim first to the shore:
27:44 and the rest also, some indeed on boards, but others on pieces also of the ship. And thus it happened for us all to come safe to the shore.
28:1 And having been saved, then we knew that that island is called Melitinē.'
28:2 But the barbarians of that place were doing a kindness with us not a little: for having kindled a fire, they received us all, because of the rain which was happening, and because of the cold.
28:3 But Paulos turned himself, he found a quantity of rubbish, and he threw it (plur.) to the fire, and from the heat came out a viper, it bit his hand.
28:4 But the barbarians having seen the wild beast hanging to his hand, they weresaying to one another: Certainly this man is a murderer, this (one) whom, after having been saved from the sea, his judgement letteth him not live.'
28:5 He (pron.) indeed then, shook the wild beast to the fire, no evil happened to him.
28:6 But they (pron.) were thinking that he will swell or will fall immediately and die: but having waited, gazing at him, and having seen that no evil thing seized him, they turned themselves immediately, saying that he was a god.
28:7 But in that place there were many fields of the first (man) of the island, his name being Pouplios: this (man) having taken us up, received us in a love of hospitality three days.
28:8 But it came to pass (that) the father of Pouplios having been sick in fevers and dysenteries was prostrate under them. But this (man)--Paulos went in unto him, he prayed, he laid his hands upon him, he healed him.
28:9 But this having been done, (the) rest who were in the island, with whom there was sickness, were coming unto him and he was healing them.
28:10 But these honoured us in great honour, and when we were about to be brought from there, they prepared for us that of which we had need.
28:11 But after three months we came in a ship of Rakoti, being on it a sign of Dioskoros, which wintered in the island.
28:12 And we put in at Sirakousas, we abode there three days.
28:13 And having come from there we reached Rēgion: and after a day a south wind was strong with us, we came the second day to Pontiolous;
28:14 and having found the brethren there, they persuaded us to abide with them seven days: and thus we came to Rome.
28:15 But the brethren who (were) there having heard concerning us, came to meet us even unto Appiophorou, and Three Tabernōn: but Paulos having seen them, gave thanks to God, and took courage.
28:16 But when we went into Rōmē, he commanded Paulos to abide alone with the soldier who kept him.
28:17 But it came to pass after three days (that) he called the first (men) of the Jews who were there: but they having come thither, he was saying to them, I, [the] men, our brethren, did not anything in opposition to the people or the customs of our fathers, I was bound, from Jerusalem I was delivered to (the) hands of the Romans:
28:18 these having examined (me), were wishing to release me, because they found not any cause of (the) death being in me.
28:19 But, the Jews making objection, it was necessary for me to appeal to (the) king, not as that there is anything of accusation to make against my nation.
28:20 Because of this reason, then, I was praying to see you, and to speak to you: for concerning (the) hope of Israel I am bound by this chain.
28:21 But they (pron.) said to him: 'To us (pron.) neither came writing from [the] Ioudea, nor came one from the brethren and showed to us or said an evil word against thee.
28:22 But we think right to bear from thee the things which thou thinkest: for concerning this sect the thing is manifest to us, that objection is made concerning it in every place.'
28:23 But they appointed to him a day, they came unto him to the lodging, being many: and he declared to them, witnessing to them concerning the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, from (the) law of Mōysēs and the prophets, from early unto evening.
28:24 And some indeed were being persuaded by the things which he was saying; but others were being unbelieving.
28:25 But disagreeing amongst themselves, Paulos dismissed them, saying one word to them: 'Well spake the holy spirit through Ēsaēas the prophet to your fathers,
28:26 saying: "Go unto this people, say to them: In a hearing ye shall hear, and ye shall not understand; in a seeing ye shall see, and ye shall not see.'
28:27 For (the) heart of this people thickened, and they were heavy for (the) hearing in their ears, and they shut their eyes, lest by any means they might see with their eyes, and hear in their ears, and understand in their heart, and return, and I heal them."
28:28 Let the thing be manifest to you, that God sent his saviour among the Gentiles, they (pron.) also (are they) who will hear.'
28:29 Omitted
28:30 But he abode two whole years in the place which he took for his own hired house, and he was receiving all who come in unto him,
28:31 proclaiming the kingdom of God, and teaching all in boldness concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, and there was not any hindering him.
28:32