1:1 Paul (the) apostle, not from man, nor through man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, he (lit. this) who raised him from them who are dead,
1:2 and all the brethren who are with me, to the churches of (the) Galatia:
1:3 (The) grace to you and (the) peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ,
1:4 he (lit. this) who gave himself for our sins, to the end that he might save us out of this age which is evil, which exists, according to the will of God and the Father:
1:5 whose is the glory unto age of the ages. Amēn.
1:6 I wonder that thus quickly they remove you from him who called you in (the) grace of Christ unto another Gospel;
1:7 which is not another; except perhaps that there are some troubling you, wishing to pervert the Gospel of Christ.
1:8 But even if we, or an angel from (the) heaven, preach good tidings to you outside of that which we preached to you, let him be an anathema.
1:9 As we said before, and now again I say, that he who will preach good tidings to you outside of that which ye received, let him be an anathema.
1:10 For now did I persuade [the] men or God? Or did I seek for pleasing man? If I was pleasing man still, then I (am) no longer a servant of Christ.
1:11 But I show to you, my brethren, the Gospel, which was preached by me, that it is not one according to man.
1:12 For neither did I (pron.) receive it from man, nor was it taught to me, but through a revelation of Jesus Christ.
1:13 For ye heard of my walk (of life) once in the Judaism, that abundantly I was persecuting the church of God, and I was devastating it:
1:14 I was advancing in the Judaism more than many of my age in my race, being more (a) zealot in the things which my fathers delivered unto me.
1:15 But when God was well pleased, he who separated me from (the) womb of my mother, and he called me by his grace,
1:16 to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach good tidings of him among the Gentiles; immediately I applied not to flesh and blood,
1:17 nor went I up to Jerusalem unto the apostles, who were before me. But I went to (the) Arabia. Again I returned to Damascos.
1:18 Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Kēpha, and I stayed with him fifteen days.
1:19 But another of the apostles I saw not, except James (the) brother of the Lord.
1:20 But the things which I write to you, behold, before God, that I say not falsehood.
1:21 But after these things I came to the parts of [the] Syria and [the] Kylikia.
1:22 But the churches of [the] Judea, which were in Christ, were not knowing me in my face:
1:23 but only they were wont to hear, that he who was persecuting us once, now preacheth good tidings of the faith which he was devastating once;
1:24 and they were glorifying God in me.
2:1 Then after fourteen years I went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas; but I took Titus also with me.
2:2 But I went up according to a revelation, and I laid before them the Gospel, which I proclaim among the Gentiles; but apart to them who were thought (much of), lest by any means I ran vainly, or was running.
2:3 But neither Titos even who was with me, being a Greek, could be compelled to be circumcised.
2:4 But because of the false brethren who came in to spy out our freedom, this which we have in Christ, that they might make us servants:
2:5 these in whose subjection we stayed not for an hour; that the truth of the Gospel might be permanent with you.
2:6 But from them who think that they (lit. we) are (something); as to the manner of which they once were, it makes not any difference to me: God accepteth not person of man. For they, who think that they (lit. we) are something, added not anything to me:
2:7 but on the contrary, having see that I was entrusted with the Gospel of the uncircumcision, according as Peter was entrusted with that of the circumcision.
2:8 For he who worked in Peter unto an apostleship of (the) circumcision worked in me also unto the Gentiles.
2:9 And having known the grace which is given to me, James and Kēphas and John, who are thought to be pillars, Gave the right hand to me and Barnabas unto [a] fellowship, that we indeed might (be) unto the Gentiles, but they unto the circumcision
2:10 only that we should take care of the poor; and this I hastened to do.
2:11 But Kēphas having come into (the) Antiochia, I opposed him, face to face, because he has been condemned.
2:12 For before that any came from James he was wont to eat with the Gentiles: but they having come he withdrew by himself and he separated himself, fearing them of (the) circumcision.
2:13 And the rest of the Jews were hypocritical with him; so that Barnabas also went (away) in their hypocrisy.
2:14 But having seen that they stood not in the truth of the Gospel, I said to Kēphas before all: ‘If thou thyself a Jew livest as a Gentile and not as a Jew how compellest thou the Gentiles to Judaise?
2:15 But we are by nature Jews, and not of the Gentiles, sinners.
2:16 We are knowing that the man will not be justified from the works of the law, except from (the) faith of Jesus Christ; and we also believed Christ Jesus, that we might be justified from (the) faith Christ, not from the works of the law: because from the works of the law will no flesh be justified.
2:17 But if, seeking for being justified in Christ, we also were found to be (lit. being) sinners, then Christ is a minister of (the) sin. It shall not be.
2:18 For if the things which I pulled down, these again I build, I prove myself (a) transgressor.
2:19 For I (pron.) through [a] law died to the law, that I might live with God. I was crucified with Christ;
2:20 I live, no longer I, but Christ liveth in me: but that in which I live now in (the) flesh, I lived in the faith of (the) Son of God, he (lit. this) who loved me, and gave himself for me.
2:21 I shall (lit. will) not reject the grace of God.
3:1 O [the] foolish Galatians, who bewitched you, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was fore-written, having been crucified?
3:2 This only (is it) which I wish to know from you. Received ye the spirit from the works of the law or from (the) hearing of (the) faith?
3:3 Thus ye are foolish. Having begun in the spirit, [but] now ye complete in (the) flesh.
3:4 Ye suffer many toils in vain, if indeed in vain.
3:5 He then who supplieth the spirit to you, and who worketh powers among you, is it something from the works of the law, or from (the) hearing of the faith?
3:6 According as Abraham believed God, it was reckoned to him for [a] righteousness.
3:7 Ye know, then, that they (who are) from (the) faith, these (are) the sons of Abraam.
3:8 But the Scripture having foreseen that from (the) faith God will justify the Gentiles, preached good tidings before to Abraam: All the Gentiles shall be blessed in thee.'
3:9 Wherefore they (who are) from (the) faith will be blessed with the faithful Abraam.
3:10 For all who are from the works of the law, are under (the) curse: for it is written: 'Cursed is every one who will not stay in all the things which are written on (the) book of this law unto (the) doing them.'
3:11 Because in the works of the law no one will be justified with God. It is manifested, that the righteous is to live from (the) faith.
3:12 But the law is not from the faith; but he who will do them, shall live in them.
3:13 Christ bought us from (the) curse of the law, having become a curse for us: for it is written: Cursed is every one who hangeth on (the) tree:'
3:14 that (the) blessing of Abraam might be among the Gentiles in Christ Jesus; that we might receive the promise of the spirit through (the) faith.
3:15 My brethren, I spoke according to man: though (it is) a covenant of a man, should it he confirmed, no one rejecteth it, nor add they fresh ordinance.
3:16 But promises were promised to Abraam and his seed. He was not saying: And his seeds,' as about many; but as about one: 'And thy seed,' which is Christ.
3:17 But this I say, that a covenant having been confirmed before by God, (the) law which happened after four hundred (and) thirty years dissolveth it not, to cause it to do away with the promise.
3:18 For if the inheritance is from (the) law, then it is no more from a promise: but God granted to Abraam through a promise.
3:19 What then is (the) law? It was given because of the transgressions, until the seed should come, to whom he promised; having been ordained through angels, in (the) hand of a mediator:
3:20 but the mediator is not of one, but God is one.
3:21 (The) law then was against the promises of God. It shall not be: for if law had been given, it being possible for it to give life, certainly [the] righteousness would have been from the law.
3:22 But (the) Scripture shut (up) everything in (the) sin, that the promise through (the) faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them who believe.
3:23 Before the faith came we were being kept under the law, being shut (up) unto the faith which cometh to be revealed.
3:24 Wherefore the law guided us to Christ, that we might be justified from (the) faith.
3:25 But the faith having come, we are no more under a guide.
3:26 For ye all are sons of God, through (the) faith, in Christ Jesus.
3:27 For ye all, namely they who were baptised in Christ, clothe you with Christ.
3:28 There is not Jew nor Greek, there is not servant nor free, there is not male nor female: for ye all are one in Christ.
3:29 If ye (are) they of Christ, then ye (are) they of (the) seed of Abraam, according to the promise ye (are) heirs.
4:1 I say that as long as the heir is a little child there is not any difference between him and a servant, though he be (lit. being) lord of all things.
4:2 But he was under guardians and stewards unto the term of his father.
4:3 Thus we also, when we were children, were being under the elements of the world, being servants to them:
4:4 but when (the) fulness of the time came, God sent his Son, having become under a woman, having become under the law,
4:5 that he might buy them who are under the law, that we might receive the sonship.
4:6 But because ye (are) sons, God sent the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying out: ‘Abba, (the) Father.'
4:7 Wherefore thou (art) no more a servant, but a son; but if a son, then an heir also through God.
4:8 But at that time indeed not knowing God, ye were servants to them by nature who are not gods:
4:9 but now ye knew God, but rather God knew you; how return ye again into the feeble and poor elements to which ye wish to be servants another time?
4:10 Having observed days and months and times and years;
4:11 I am afraid of you, lest by any means I toiled for you in vain.
4:12 Become as I (am), because I also (am) as ye (are). My brethren, I beseech you, ye did me not any wrong:
4:13 but ye know that because of a weakness of the flesh I preached good tidings to you at first:
4:14 and your temptation which is in my flesh ye despised not, nor reviled it; but ye received him as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus.
4:15 Where was then your felicitation? For I witness to you, that if it had been possible for you to pluck out your eyes, ye would have given them to me.
4:16 Wherefore I became enemy to you; because I show to you (the) truth.
4:17 They are zealous unto you, not well; but wishing to shut you (out), that ye may be zealous unto them.
4:18 But it is good to be zealous in the good always, and not only (when) I am with you.
4:19 My children, they (lit. these) for whom I travail again, until Christ be formed in you,
4:20 but I was wishing to come to you now, and to change my voice; because I am doubtful about you.
4:21 Say then to me, ye who wish to be under the law--ye know not the law.
4:22 For it is written that Abraam begat two sons, one from the maidservant, and one from the free-(woman).
4:23 But he indeed who was (lit. the) from the maidservant was born according to flesh; but he who was (lit. the) from the free(woman) is one from a promise,
4:24 which things contain an allegory; these are two covenants, one indeed from (the) mountain Sina bearing (children) unto [a] servitude, that is to say, Agar.
4:25 But Agar is (the) mountain Sina, being in (the) Arabia; but it was ranked along with present Jerusalem; for she is servant with her children.
4:26 But Jerusalem which is above is a freewoman, that is to say, our mother.
4:27 For it is written: 'Delight thyself, [the] barren woman, she who beareth not. Break forth and cry out, she who travaileth not; because many are the children of the desolate (woman), rather than (of) her who hath the husband.'
4:28 But we, our brethren, according to Isaac, are children of the promise.
4:29 But as at that time he who was born according to flesh was persecuting him who was born according to the spirit, thus also now.
4:30 But what is it which the Scripture saith? Cast out this maidservant and her son: for (the) son of the maidservant shall not inherit with (the) son of the free(woman).
4:31 But we, our brethren, are not (the) children of the maidservant, but the free(woman).
5:1 For in [the] freedom Christ made us free. Stand then, and put (lit, give) not yourselves under a yoke of servitude.
5:2 Behold, I Paul, I say to you, that if you should receive circumcision, Christ will not profit you anything.
5:3 But I witness again to every man who receiveth circumcision, that he is debtor to do (the) whole law.
5:4 Ye were done away with from Christ; they who justify themselves in the law--ye fell from the grace.
5:5 For we (pron.) in the spirit, from [a] faith look out forward for [a] hope of [a] righteousness.
5:6 For in Christ Jesus neither (the) circumcision hath power, nor the uncircumcision, but [a] faith being worked through [the] love.
5:7 But ye were running well; who prevented you (so as) not to be persuaded of (the) truth?
5:8 This persuasion is not [a] from him who calleth you.
5:9 A little leaven causeth the whole lump to be leavened.
5:10 For I am persuaded about you in the Lord, that ye will not think another thing: but he who troubleth you is bearing the judgement, he who he is.
5:11 But I, my brethren, if it is still [a] circumcision which I proclaim, then why am I persecuted? So then the stumblingblock of the cross of Christ was done away with.
5:12 I would that they were mutilated who trouble you.
5:13 For ye (pron.), my brethren, were called unto [a] freedom; only bring not the freedom into a pretext of the flesh. But through [the] love be servants to one another.
5:14 For the whole law was fulfilled in one word, in (the) loving thy neighbour as thyself.
5:15 But if ye bite one another and devour (lit. eat), see lest by any means ye should be consumed by one another.
5:16 But I say: Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of your flesh.'
5:17 For the flesh lusteth against the spirit; but the spirit against the flesh; for these are opposed to one another; that the things which ye wish, these ye may not do.
5:18 But if ye walk in the spirit, then ye are under (the) law no more.
5:19 But the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; [the] fornication, uncleanness, defilement,
5:20 idolatry, sorcery, enmities, strifes, jealousies, wraths, revellings, divisions, heresies,
5:21 envyings, murders, drunkennesses, quarrellings, and the things which are like to these, these of which I say to you before, according as also I said before, that they who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
5:22 But (the) fruit of the spirit, this is [a]a love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faith,
5:23 meekness, temperance; law is not against such things.
5:24 But those of Christ Jesus crucified their flesh with its passions and its lusts.
5:25 But if we live in the spirit, then let us also agree with the spirit.
5:26 Let us not be in a love of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another.
6:1 My brethren, if a man should go in transgression, ye, namely the spiritual ones, correct such a one in a spirit of meekness; considering thyself also, lest by any means thou should be tempted.
6:2 Bear the burdens of one another: thus ye will fulfil the law of Christ.
6:3 But if any one thinketh that he (lit. I) is (something), being nothing, he deceived himself.
6:4 Let each one prove his work, and then his boast shall be to himself, and not to his neighbour.
6:5 For each one shall carry his own burden.
6:6 Let him who is instructed share with him who instructeth him with the word in every good (thing).
6:7 Be not led astray; God will not be derided. For that which [the] man will sow, this also he will reap.
6:8 Because he who will sow unto his flesh will reap also of his flesh [a] destruction; but he who sowed the spirit will reap also from the spirit [a] life eternal.
6:9 But doing the good let us not faint; for in a time of our own we shall (lit. will) reap, not losing heart.
6:10 So then while we have [a] time, let us work the good with all, but mostly with them of the household of (the) faith.
6:11 See that I wrote to you in writings of size with (lit. in) my hand.
6:12 They who wish to make a fair show in (the) flesh, these (are they) who compel you to receive circumcision, only that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
6:13 For not even themselves also, who were circumcised, keep the law; but they wished for you to receive circumcision, that they may boast themselves in your flesh.
6:14 But it shall not be to me (pron.) that I should boast myself, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, he (lit. this) through whom the world was crucified to me, and I also was crucified to the world.
6:15 For in Christ Jesus neither (the) circumcision is anything, nor [the] uncircumcision, but it is a new creature.
6:16 All who agree with this canon, (the) peace upon them, and the mercy, and upon the Israel of God.
6:17 Henceforth let not any one molest me, for I (pron.) bear the brands of Christ in my body.
6:18 (The) grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with your spirit, my brethren. Amen.
6:19