1:1 Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timotheos the brother, to Phylimōn our beloved, and our fellow-worker,
1:2 and Apphia the sister, and Archippos our fellow-soldier, and the church of their house.
1:3 (The) grace to you and (the) peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:4 I give thanks to my God always, remembering thee in my prayers.
1:5 I heard concerning thy love and thy faith, this which thou hast in the Lord Jesus, and (to) all the saints;
1:6 That the fellowship of thy faith may become working in (the) knowledge of all good, this which is in you unto Christ.
1:7 For I received a great joy and [a] comfort in (ea,. exert) thy love. Because the inmost heart of the saints was rested through thee, [the] brother.
1:8 Therefore I have a great boldness in the Lord to command thee the things which are right:
1:9 because of (the) love rather I beseech thee, one such as I, Paul the old man, but now also the prisoner of Christ Jesus:
1:10 I beseech thee concerning my child, he whom I begat in my bonds, Onēsimos,
1:11 he who was being unserviceable to thee once, but now he is serviceable to me and thee: he whom I sent to thee,
1:12 but thou receive him, that is to say, my inmost heart.
1:13 He whom I (pron.) was wishing to hold with me, that he might minister to me instead of thee in the bonds of the Gospel:
1:14 but without thy opinion I wished not to do anything, that thy goodness might not be according to a necessity, but in a readiness of heart.
1:15 For perhaps therefore he was separated from thee for an hour, that thou mightest take him for ever;
1:16 not any more as a servant, but (a.) as a brother beloved, being better than a servant, especially to me, how much then rather to thee, both in (the) flesh and in the Lord.
1:17 If then I am with thee as a partner receive him thus.
1:18 But if he did thee any wrong, or whether he is in debt to (thee), reckon this to me;
1:19 I Paul, I wrote it with (lit. in) my hand, I will pay: that I may not say to thee that thou art debtor thyself to give thee to me.
1:20 Yea, my own (pron.) brother, I shall rest me in thee in the Lord: give rest to my inmost heart in Christ.
1:21 Being persuaded about thine obedience I wrote to thee, knowing that thou wilt do more than the things which I say.
1:22 But withal prepare for me a lodging: for I hope that through your prayers I shall (lit. will) be granted to you.
1:23 Apaphras my fellow-captive saluteth thee in Christ Jesus;
1:24 Markos, Aristarchos, Dēmas, Loukas, my fellowworkers.
1:25 (The) grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with your spirit.
1:26