1:1 James, (the) servant of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes who are in the dispersion, hail.
1:2 Be in all joy, my brethren, if ye should fall into various temptations;
1:3 knowing that the proof of your faith worked [a] patience,
1:4 But [the] patience--let a complete work be in it (sc. patience), that ye may be complete and sound, and that ye may not be deficient of anything.
1:5 But if there is one among you deficient of wisdom, let him ask from God, who giveth to all simply, reproaching not; and it shall be given to him.
1:6 But let him ask in [a] faith, doubting not. For he who doubteth was as the waves of the sea, the wind taking them and bringing them.
1:7 For let not that man think to himself, that he will take anything from the Lord;
1:8 but the man who doubteth is unsteady on all his ways.
1:9 But let the brother who is in humble (position) boast himself in his exaltation:
1:10 but the rich in his humiliation: because as a flower of [a] grass he will pass (away).
1:11 For (the) sun arose with the scorching heat and dried the grass; and its flower fell off, but (the) beauty of its face perished: thus also the rich in all his ways will wither.
1:12 Blessed is the man who will endure in a temptation, because, should he be a chosen (one), he will receive the crown of (the) life, which he promised to them who will love him.
1:13 Let not any one say, being tempted, that it is God who tempteth me: for God tempteth not in evil things, but he (pron.) tempteth not any one:
1:14 but each one is being tempted by his own lust drawing him and enticing him.
1:15 Then the lust should it conceive bringeth forth (the) sin: but (the) sin should it be completed begetteth (the) death.
1:16 Go not astray, my brethren, my beloved.
1:17 All good gifts and all complete gifts are from above, coming below from the Father of the lights, with whom there is not change, nor a form of a shadow which passed.
1:18 He wished, he begat us in (the) word of the truth, to cause us to be a firstfruit of his creatures.
1:19 But we know, my brethren, my beloved. But let every man be in haste about to hear, slow about to speak, slow about to be angry.
1:20 For (the) anger of (the) man worketh not the righteousness of God.
1:21 Therefore lay down all filthiness and (the) abundance of [the] malice, in [a] meekness receive the word, newly grown up, for which it is possible to save your souls.
1:22 Be doers of the word, and not listeners only, otherwise ye are deceiving your own selves.
1:23 He who is a listener of the word, and not a worker, [this] was like to a man who beheld (the) face of his birth in a mirror:
1:24 for he beheld it, and he went away, and immediately he forgat the manner (of man) which he was being.
1:25 But he who gazed at (the) law which is complete of the freedom, and stayed in it, he is not (a) forgetful hearer, but (a) doer of the work, this (one) shall be blessed in that which he doeth.
1:26 But he who thinketh that he is a server (of God), bridling not his tongue, but he deceived his heart, (the) service of this (one) is vain.
1:27 But the pure service and unstained with God and the Father is this, to visit the orphans and the widows in their tribulation, to keep himself unspotted from the world.
2:1 My brethren, have not the faith of (the) glory of our Lord Jesus Christ in a respect of persons.
2:2 For if a man cometh into your synagogue wearing a gold ring on his finger, in (a) splendid raiment, but a poor (man) also entereth in (an) unwashed raiment;
2:3 and ye look upon him who weareth the splendid raiment, and say: Thou, sit thee here in a good place'; and ye say to the poor man also: 'Thou, stand there or sit here at (the) place of putting the feet.'
2:4 Did you not put a distinction among yourselves, and ye become judges of (lit. in) evil thoughts?
2:5 Hear, my brethren, my beloved; was not God choosing the poor of the world, rich in the faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to them who will love him?
2:6 But ye dishonour the poor (man). Is it not the rich who tyrannise you? And they (are those) who draw you to places of giving judgement.
2:7 Are not they (those) who blaspheme the good name which was called over you.
2:8 If indeed ye fulfil the royal law according to the Scriptures: 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,' ye do well:
2:9 If ye respect persons, ye work (the) sin; (the) law convicting you as transgressors of the law.
2:10 For he who will keep (the) law, and fall in one (commandment), became guilty of them all.
2:11 For he who said: 'Thou shalt not commit adultery,' he (pron.) again said: 'Thou shalt not kill.' If thou committest not adultery, but killest, thou became transgressor of the law.
2:12 Speak thus and do thus, as about to be judged through (the) law of the freedom.
2:13 For the judgement is without mercy to him who showed (lit. did) not the mercy: for (the) mercy boasteth itself over [the]. judgement.
2:14 What is (the) profit, my brethren, if one say: 'I have faith,' but he hath not works? Is it possible that [the] faith should save him without the works?
2:15 But if there is a brother or a sister naked, and in want of (the) food of the day,
2:16 and one of you indeed say to them: Go in [a] peace, be warmed and satisfied'; and yet ye give not to them for (the) need of the body; what is the profit?
2:17 Thus [the] faith also, if there is not work in it, is dead by itself.
2:18 But one will say: Thou (pron.) hast [a] faith, but I (pron.) have works: show to me thy faith without the works, but I (pron.) will show to thee my faith from my works.'
2:19 Thou (pron.) believest that God is one; thou doest well: the demons also believe, and they tremble.
2:20 But thou wishest to know, O (the) man, who art vain, that [the] faith without the works is dead.
2:21 Abraam our father was he not justified from the works, having offered Isaak his son upon the altar?
2:22 Thou seest that [the] faith was working with the works, and in the works [the] faith was completed;
2:23 and the Scripture was fulfilled: 'Abraam believed God; it was reckoned to him for [a] righteousness'; and he was called `(the) friend of God.'
2:24 Ye see that the man was to be justified from the works, and not from [the] faith alone.
2:25 Thus again Raab the harlot--was not she justified from the works, having received the spies, and she helped them out by another way?
2:26 For as the body without the spirit is dead, thus [the] faith also without the works is dead.
3:1 Be not many teachers, my brethren, knowing that ye will receive a judgement.
3:2 For we all stumble many times. He who stumbleth not in a word, this is a perfect man, it being possible for him to bridle the whole body.
3:3 If we put (lit, give) bridle to the mouths of the horses, (it is) for them to obey us, and we drive their whole body.
3:4 Behold the ships which are so great, driven by rough winds, are guided (lit. brought) by a little helm, whither the steersman will wish to direct (lit. give) his course.
3:5 Thus also the tongue is a little member, and it speaketh great things, Behold, a little fire burneth a whole wood.
3:6 The tongue also is a fire, (the) ornament of (the) iniquity. The tongue is among the members, and it defileth the whole body; it burneth the wheel of the birth, and it burneth by the Geenna.
3:7 For all natures of the beasts and the birds and the creeping things and those which are in the seas are tamed, and are subject to the nature of [the] humanity:
3:8 but the tongue itself there is not any man who can make it subject; it is an unsettled (thing), being evil, being full of poison of (the) death.
3:9 We blessed God and the Father by it; and from it we revile [the] men, whom God made like to him:
3:10 from the same mouth come forth the blessing and the cursing. That which is not right to be, my brethren, (is it) that these things should be thus.
3:11 Doth the fountain pour forth that which is sweet and that which is salt from the same one opening?
3:12 Is it possible, my brethren, for the fig-tree that it should produce olives, or a vine that it should produce figs? Thus that which is sweet shall not produce a salt water.
3:13 Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show to us his works from his good walk (of life) in [a] meekness of [a] wisdom.
3:14 But if there is bitter jealousy among you and strife in your hearts, boast not yourselves and speak (not) falsehood against the truth.
3:15 This wisdom was not coming down from above, but is that of (the) earth, psychic, demon-form.
3:16 For where there is jealousy or strife, (the) confusion is there and every evil work.
3:17 But the wisdom which is from above, first indeed it is pure, then it is peacemaking, it is fair, full of mercy, and good fruit, it is not self-judging, it is not hypocritical.
3:18 But (the) fruit of [the] peace and [the] righteousness is sown in [a] peace to them who make [the] peace.
4:1 Whence is coming war, and whence is coming dispute among you? Is it not from these, from your pleasures which are armed in your members?
4:2 Ye lust, and ye have not: ye kill, and ye are jealous, it is not possible for you to obtain: ye strive, ye make war; and ye have not, because that ye ask not.
4:3 Ye ask, and ye receive not, because ye ask badly, That from your pleasures ye may spend.
4:4 [The] adulterers, ye know not that the friendship of the world is [an] enmity of God. But he. who wisheth to be friend unto the world will become enemy unto God.
4:5 Or know ye not that the Scripture saith, In vain, or in [an] Scriptureenvy, the spirit which dwelleth in us yearneth?
4:6 But he giveth [a] great grace. Therefore he saith God opposeth the proud, but to them who are humble he will give [a] grace.'
4:7 Subject yourselves then to God, but oppose the devil; he shall flee from you.
4:8 Draw near to God; he shall draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, [the] sinners; cleanse your hearts, (ye) double-minded.
4:9 Be miserable, and mourn, and weep: your laughter--let it turn to [a] mourning, and your joy to [a] sadness.
4:10 Humiliate yourselves before God, that he may exalt you.
4:11 Speak not against one another, my brethren. For he who speaketh against his brother, or is judging his brother, spoke against the law, and he judged the law: but if thou judgest the law, then, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge.
4:12 For one is the lawgiver and judge, for whom it is possible to save and to destroy: who art thou, namely thou (lit. he), who judgest thy neighbour?
4:13 Go to now ye (lit. they) who say: To-day or to-morrow we shall (lit. will) go to this city and spend a year there, and trade and find gain,'
4:14 they who know not what will happen on the (lit. his) morrow. For what is your life? It was as a vapour, appearing for a little, then it perisheth.
4:15 Instead ye (should) say: 'If the Lord should wish, and we live, we shall (lit. will) do this or that.'
4:16 Now ye boast yourselves in your arrogancies: but all such boastings are evil.
4:17 He who knoweth a good (thing) to do it, and doeth it not, it is a sin to him.
5:1 Go to now, [the] rich, weep, crying out for your miseries which come upon you.
5:2 Your wealth corrupted, your clothes (the) moth ate.
5:3 Your gold and your silver rusted; and their rust will be to you for a witness, and it will eat up your flesh (plur.) as a fire. Ye gather up in last days.
5:4 Behold, (the) hire of the labourers who reaped your fields, which was defrauded by you, crieth out: and the voices of the reapers went into (the) ears of the Lord Sabaōth.
5:5 Ye were in delight upon (the) earth, and ye are luxurious; and ye nourish your hearts unto (the) day of (the) slaughter.
5:6 Ye judged, and ye kill the righteous (one); he opposeth you not.
5:7 Be longsuffering, my brethren, until (the) coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman is looking out forward to the precious fruit of (the) earth, and he is longsuffering for it, until he receive the first fruit and the last.
5:8 Be ye also longsuffering, and confirm your hearts; because the coming of the Lord drew near.
5:9 Murmur not against one another, my brethren, that ye be not judged: behold, the judge standeth at the doors.
5:10 Take a pattern for you, my brethren, of [the] suffering and [the] longsuffering of the prophets, who spoke in (the) name of the Lord.
5:11 Lo, we call them blessed who endure. Ye heard of the patience of Jōb, and ye saw the finishing of the Lord, that the Lord is very full of pity, and is long-suffering.
5:12 First indeed of everything, my brethren, swear not, neither by (the) heaven, nor by (the) earth, nor any other oath: but let your word be a yea yea, nay nay, that ye may not be under a judgement.
5:13 But if there is one suffering among you, let him pray. He who is in delight of heart, let him sing praise.
5:14 But if there is one sick among you, let him call the presbyters of the church; and let them pray over him, having anointed him with [an] oil in (the) name of the Lord:
5:15 and (the) prayer of (the) faith shall save him who is pained, and the Lord shall raise him (up); Even if he committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.
5:16 Confess then your sins to one another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed. There is a great power in (the) prayer of the righteous (man), which worketh.
5:17 Elias was also a man, suffering as we, and he prayed a prayer for (the) heaven not to rain; and it rained not upon the earth for three years and six months.
5:18 And he prayed again, (the) heaven gave a rain, and (the) earth sprouted, it gave its fruit.
5:19 My brethren, if one among you should go astray from the truth, and one make him return;
5:20 let him who will make return a sinner from (the) way of his error know, that he will save his soul from (the) death, and he will cover over many sins.
5:21