1:2 I. Paul, (the) servant of Jesus Christ, (the) apostle who is called,
1:3 he who was ordained unto the preaching good tidings of God, which he promised before through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
1:4 concerning his Son; who was made from (the) seed of David according to flesh.
1:5 (The) Son of God who is ordained in [a] power, according to (a) holy spirit, by (lit. from the) resurrection of the dead; Jesus Christ our Lord,
1:6 through whom we received [a] grace and an apostleship, unto an obedience of (the) faith among all the Gentiles, for his name:
1:7 among whom are ye also, they who are called, of Jesus Christ:
1:8 to all who are in Rome, the beloved of God who are called, 'who are holy.
1:9 (The) grace to you and (the) peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. First indeed I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is proclaimed in all the world.
1:10 For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, how I cease not remembering you,
1:11 always in my prayers; praying that my journey may perhaps be disposed in the wish of God to come to you.
1:12 For I wish to see you, that I may give to you [a] spiritual grace, for confirming you,
1:13 that is to say (lit. which is this), for mutual comfort (lit. confirMatthewion of heart) in you through the faith which we have in common, yours and also mine.
1:14 But I wish you not to be (lit. being) ignorant, my brethren, that I have many times disposed myself to come o you, and I was prevented up till now. That I may receive [a] fruit among you also, according as also the rest of the Gentiles.
1:15 I have a debt to the Greeks and the Barbarians, the wise and the foolish,
1:16 so ready am I to preach the good tidings to you also, namely those who are in Rome.
1:17 For I am not ashamed of the Gospel: for it is the (lit. a) power of God unto [a] salvation to all who believe; the Jew first, and the Greek.
1:18 For the (lit. a) righteousness of God will be revealed in it from [a] faith unto [a] faith, according as it is written: The righteous will live from (the) faith.'
1:19 For the anger of God will be revealed from (the) heaven upon all godlessness and (the) wrongdoing of [the] men, who 'lay hold on the truth in [the] wrongdoing:
1:20 because the knowledge of God is manifested in them. For God manifested it unto them.
1:21 His unseen things from (the) creation of the world, being understood in his creatures, are visible, that is to say, his eternal power and his divinity. So that they are without excuse (and) without answer:
1:22 because, having known God, they glorified him not as God, nor thanked him, but became vain in their reasonings, and their senseless heart became dark;
1:23 saying that they are wise, they became fools,
1:24 and exchanged the glory of incorruptible God for a likeness of an image of corruptible man and birds and beasts and creeping things.
1:25 Therefore God delivered them in the lusts of their heart unto (the) uncleanness, so that their bodies were dishonoured among them;
1:26 who changed the truth of God into [the] falsehood. And worshipped and served the creature rather than him who created, that is to say, him who is blessed unto the ages. Amen.
1:27 Therefore God delivered them unto vile passions: for their women turned their natural use into an unnatural.
1:28 Thus the men also left the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust (lit. wish) of one another, men with men working unto (the) shame, they shall receive (the) recompence which was due from their error in themselves.
1:29 And according as they did not approve to retain God in their (lit. a) knowledge, God delivered them unto a reprobate heart, to do the things which are not lawful to be done.
1:30 Being filled with all unrighteousness and wickedness and depravity and wrongdoing; being filled with envy and murder and strife and subtlety and evil thought.
1:31 Being whisperers, slanderers, haters of God, insolent, proud, boastful, inventors of [the] evil a things, disobedient to their parents,
1:32 senseless, dissentient, uncompassionate, unmerciful.
1:33 Who know the righteousness of God, that they who do such things are worthy of (the) death, not only, then, do them, but also consent with them who do them.
2:1 Therefore thou wilt not be able to answer, O man, namely every one who judgeth: for in the judgement with which thou judgest (lit. givest unto) thy neighbour, thou condemnedst thyself; for thou also doest these things, namely he who judgeth.
2:2 For we know that the judgement of God was according to [a] truth upon them who do such things.
2:3 But thinkest thou this, O man, who judgest them who do such things, and doest them also thyself, that thou indeed wilt be able to escape the judgement of God?
2:4 Or despisest thou the riches of his kindness and his forbearance and his longsuffering? Thou knowest not that the kindness of God bringeth thee unto (lit. a) repentance;
2:5 but according to thy hardness of heart and thine impenitent heart thou treasurest up (lit. throwest in) for thee anger in the day of (the) anger and the revelation of the just judgement of God;
2:6 who will give to each one according to his works.
2:7 They indeed who persisted in a good work, [a] glory and [an] honour and [an] incorruption, to them who seek for [an] eternal life.
2:8 But they who are of [a] strife and consent not with (the) truth, but are trusting to [the] wrongdoing, [an] anger and [an] indignation,
2:9 [a] tribulation and [a] pain upon every soul, of [the] men who do the evil, the Jew first, and the Greek;
2:10 but [a] glory and [an] honour and [a] peace to every one who worketh the good, the Jew first, and the Greek:
2:11 there is not respect of persons with God.
2:12 For they who sinned without law, without law also will be destroyed: and they who sinned in the law, will be judged through the law;
2:13 for not the hearers of the law are the righteous with God, but they who do the law will be justified.
2:14 For if there are the Gentiles, who have not law, (yet) by nature do the things of the law, these who have not law are (a) law to themselves.
2:15 These who manifest the work of the law written in their heart, and (with) their conscience bearing witness unto them with them, and their thoughts accusing (lit. between them with) one another, or even will excuse
2:16 in the day of God, (who) will judge the hidden things of [the] man according to my Gospel through Jesus Christ.
2:17 If thou namest thyself Jew,' thou restest thyself upon the law and boastest thyself in God,
2:18 and knowest his wish, and approvest the things which are the best, thou instructest thyself from the law.
2:19 Thou trustest that thou (art) a guide of the blind, a light of them who are in (the) darkness,
2:20 (the) teacher of the foolish and (the) master of the little children, having (the) form of (the) knowledge and the truth which is in the law.
2:21 He then who teacheth another--teachest thou not thyself? He who preacheth not to steal--stealest thou?
2:22 He who saith: 'Commit not adultery'-- committest thou adultery? He who abhorreth the idols--art thou (a) temple robber?
2:23 He who boasteth himself in the law--through the transgression of the law dishonourest thou God?
2:24 For (the) name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you, according as it is written.
2:25 For there is profit in [the] circumcision if thou should do the law; but if thou art (a) transgressor of the law, thy circumcision became uncircumcision.
2:26 If then [the] uncircumcision should keep the righteousness of the law, will not his uncircumcision be reckoned for [a] circumcision?
2:27 And the natural uncircumcision fulfilling (the) work of the law will judge thee a who art (a Jew) through the written law and the circumcision, because (or, that) thou wast a transgressor of the law.
2:28 For the Jew is not (he) who is outwardly the Jew, nor is (the) circumcision which is manifest in (the) flesh the circumcision:
2:29 but the inward (lit. who is hidden) Jew, this is the Jew, and the circumcision (is that) of the heart in [a] spirit, not in [a] writing, whose praise is not from man, but it is from God.
3:1 What then is the advantage (lit. the more) of the Jew? or what is (the) profit of the circumcision?
3:2 Much it is according to every way: first indeed because they were intrusted with the words of God.
3:3 For what if some were unbelieving? Will their unbelief do away with the faith of God?
3:4 It shall not be. But let God be speaking truth, and every man speaking falsehood; according as it is written, That thou mightest be justified in thy words and overcome when thou wilt be judged.
3:5 If our wrongdoing will set up the righteousness of God, what shall (lit. will) we say? Is God a wrongdoer being about to bring his anger? I said this humanly.
3:6 It shall not be: otherwise how will God judge the world?
3:7 But if the truth of God abounded unto his glory in my falsehood, then why am I also judged as a sinner,
3:8 and not according as we are blasphemed, as some say of us, that we say: Let us do evil things, that good things may come to us?' whose condemnation (lit. judgement) is decided (lit. under (the) judgement).
3:9 What then? Have we more? Not at all: we before found blame with the Jews and the Greeks, that they are all under (the) sin;
3:10 according as it is written: There is not a solitary righteous one;
3:11 there is not he who understandeth; there is not he who seeketh after God.
3:12 They all turned aside, they became unprofitable together; there is not he who doeth [a] kindness; there is not even (lit. up to) one:
3:13 an open sepulchre is their throat; they practised deceit with (lit. from) their tongue; a serpent poison is under their lips:
3:14 these whose mouths are full of cursing and bitterness;
3:15 their feet hasten to shed blood;
3:16 (the) crushing and (the) misery are in their ways;
3:17 and they knew not (the) way of [the] peace;
3:18 the fear of God is not before their eyes.'
3:19 But we know that all things which the law saith, it said them to those who are in the law; that the mouth of every one may be stopped, and all the world may be under the judgement of God.
3:20 Because from the works of the law no flesh will be justified with God: through the law became (the) knowing (the) sin.
3:21 But now without the law the righteousness of God was manifested, being witnessed through the law and the prophets;
3:22 but the righteousness of God which is through (the) faith of Jesus Christ in every one who believeth. For there is no distinction made;
3:23 all sinned and a they fall short of (the) glory of God;
3:24 being justified freely in his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus;
3:25 whom God before set as a forgiver, through (the) faith, in his blood, unto (the) manifesting of his righteousness, because of (the) forgiving of the former sins which were committed,
3:26 in the longsuffering of God. To cause his righteousness to be revealed at this present time: that he might be just and justifying the (man who is) of (lit. from) faith in Jesus Christ.
3:27 Where then was the boasting? It was excluded. By what law? That of [the] works? Nay; but through (the) law of (the) faith.
3:28 For we shall (lit. will) reckon a man that he will be justified in (the) faith without the works of the law.
3:29 Or is God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles indeed (pr.) also? Yea, he is of the Gentiles also.
3:30 If then God is one, he who will justify (the) circumcision from (the) faith and the uncircumcision through the faith;
3:31 shall (lit. will) we then make useless the law through the faith? It shall not be. But we shall (lit. will) set up the law.
4:1 What then shall (lit. will) we say concerning Abraam that he was found our forefather according to flesh?
4:2 For if Abraam was justified from works, then he hath boasting, but not toward God.
4:3 For what (is it) which the Scripture saith? But Abraam believed God, and it was reckoned to him for [a] righteousness.
4:4 He who worketh--his reward is not reckoned to him as a favour, but because it is owed to him.
4:5 But he who worketh not, but is believing him who justifieth the ungodly--his faith is reckoned to him for [a] righteousness.
4:6 According as also David said the blessedness of the man to whom God will reckon the righteousness without work.
4:7 Blessed are they whose lawlessnesses were forgiven, and whose sins were covered over.
4:8 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord will not reckon sin.
4:9 This blessedness then was it put upon (the) circumcision, or upon the uncircumcision? For we say that (the) faith of Abraam was reckoned to him for [a] righteousness.
4:10 How then was it reckoned? when he was in (the) circumcision, or when he was in the uncircumcision? Not when he was in (the) circumcision, but in the uncircumcision:
4:11 and he received a sign (namely) of (the) circumcision, a seal of the righteousness, of (the) faith which was in the uncircumcision; to cause him to be father of all a who believe, though they be in uncircumcision, for [a] righteousness to be reckoned to them;
4:12 and father of (the) circumcision, not of them only who are of (lit. from) (the) circumcision, but also (of) those who walk in the footsteps of (the) faith which was in the uncircumcision of our father Abraam.
4:13 For not through the law was the promise given to Abraam, or his seed to cause him to be heir of the world, but through the righteousness of (the) faith.
4:14 For if through (the) law they were the heirs; then the faith became void, and the promise was made useless:
4:15 for (the) law worked (an) anger; but where there is not law, neither is there transgression.
4:16 Therefore (it is) through (a) faith; that (it may be) according to (a) grace, to cause the promise to be confirmed to all the seed, not only that which is of (lit. from) the law, but also that which is of (lit. from) (the) faith of Abraam, who is father of us all.
4:17 According as it is written:  'I made (lit. put) thee father of a multitude of nations' before God whom he believed, who giveth life to the dead, and calleth those who are not existing as (if) they were existing.
4:18 Who was not being without hope in a thing; he believed with a hope, to become a multitude of nations, according as it was said to him: 'Thy seed shall be thus.'
4:19 And having not been weak in the faith, considering (pret.) his body, be found it as being already dead, (for) he was about a hundred years old; and the deadness also of (the) womb of Sarra.
4:20 And having not doubted in (an) unbelief of the promise of God. But he was strong in the faith, giving (pret.) glory to God;
4:21 and he was persuaded, that that which he promised it was possible for him to do.
4:22 Therefore it was reckoned to him for [a] righteousness.
4:23 But it was not written for him alone that it was reckoned to him;
4:24 but also for us, namely, those to whom it was reckoned, who believe him who raised Jesus Christ our Lord from them who are dead,
4:25 who was given for our sins, and he rose for our justification.
5:1 Having been justified then through (the) faith, let us make [a] peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
5:2 through whom became to us (the) entrance in faith into this grace in which we stand, and are boasting ourselves in a hope of (the) glory of God.
5:3 But not only (so), but we are also boasting ourselves in the tribulations, knowing that the tribulation worked [a] patience:
5:4 but [the] patience, [an] approval; but [the] approval, [a] hope;
5:5 but [the] hope is not ashamed, because the love of God was shed in our hearts through the holy spirit which he gave to us.
5:6 For if yet when we were weak once, Christ died for the ungodly,
5:7 for scarcely would one (go) as far as to die for a righteous man, for perhaps one would dare to die for the good.
5:8 But God commended his love to us, because we being yet sinners, Christ died for us.
5:9 Much more, having been justified now on account of his blood, we shall be saved through him from (the) anger.
5:10 For if being enemies we were reconciled to God through (the) death of his Son, much more having been reconciled to him we shall be saved in his life;
5:11 but not only (so), but (a.) we also boast ourselves in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we received the reconciliation.
5:12 Therefore, according as (the) sin came into the world through one man, and through (the) sin (the) death happened, and thus the death went into every man in whom they sinned.
5:13 For until (the) law (the) death was being in the world: but (the) sin was not being reckoned, there being no law.
5:14 But (the) death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over them who did not sin in (the) likeness of the transgression of Adam, who is (the) type of him who cometh.
5:15 But not according as the trespass so is the grace. For if in the trespass of one many died, much more the grace of God and the free gift in the grace of the one man Jesus Christ abounded unto many.
5:16 And not according as through one who sinned (so) is the gift: for the judgement indeed is through one unto a condemnation, but the grace through many trespasses unto a justification.
5:17 For if through (the) sin of the one (the) death reigned, much more they who will receive the abundance of the grace and the free gift of the righteousness shall reign in a life for ever through one man Jesus Christ.
5:18 So then according as (the) sin happened through the one, coming (lit. it came) upon all men unto a condemnation; thus also the justification through one is upon all men unto a justification of (the) life.
5:19 For as through (the) disobedience of the one man the many became sinners, thus also through (the) obedience of the one the many will become righteous.
5:20 But (the) law entered that (the) sin might be multiplied; but he whose sin abounded the grace was multiplied to him in abundance:
5:21 that according as (the) sin reigned in (the) death, thus also the grace might reign through the righteousness, unto a life for ever through Jesus Christ our Lord.
6:1 What then shall (lit. will) we say? We shall (lit. will) remain in (the) sin, that the grace may abound.
6:2 It shall not be. We who died to (the) sin, how again shall (lit. will) we live in it?
6:3 Or know ye not that we, namely, those who were baptised in Christ, were baptised unto his death?
6:4 We were buried then with him through the baptism unto his death. That as he rose from them who are dead through (the) glory of the Father, thus we also might walk in a newness of [a] life.
6:5 For if we shared in being planted in (the) form of his death, [but] we shall be also unto his resurrection;
6:6 knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, that (the) body of (the) sin might be done away so as not to be servant to (the) sin any more;
6:7 for he who died was justified from (the) sin.
6:8 But if we died with Christ, we believe that we shall (lit. will) live with him also;
6:9 knowing that Christ having risen from them who are dead will not die any more; (the) death then will not be lord over him.
6:10 For that which he died he died unto (the) sin once: but that which he liveth he liveth to God:
6:11 thus also think of yourselves, that ye are dead indeed unto (the) sin, but ye are living to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
6:12 Let not (the) sin then reign in your bodies, which will die, ye obeying its lusts:
6:13 neither present your members instruments of [the] iniquity to (the) sin; but present yourselves to God, as those (lit. some) who are alive from the dead, and your members instruments of the righteousness of God:
6:14 for (the) sin will not be lord over you; for ye were not being under (the) law, but under the grace.
6:15 What then? (Is it) that we should sin, because we are not under (the) law, but under the grace? it shall not be.
6:16 Or know ye not that to whom ye present yourselves servants unto (the) obeying him, ye (are) servants of him whom ye obey; whether (of the) sin unto a death, or (the) obedience unto [the] righteousness?
6:17 But thanks to God, that ye were being servants to (the) sin, but ye obeyed from your heart the form of teaching unto which ye were given:
6:18 ye became free from (the) sin, but ye became servants to [the] righteousness.
6:19 A human thing I say, because of (the) weakness of your flesh: [for] as ye presented your members servants to (the) uncleanness and the lawlessness [down] unto the lawlessness, thus also now present your members servants to the righteousness [up] unto (the) sanctification.
6:20 For when ye were servants of (the) sin ye were being free from [the] righteousness:
6:21 what fruit then was there being to you at that (lit. the) time in the things of which ye are ashamed now? for (the) end of them is (the) death:
6:22 but now ye became free from (the) sin, ye became servants of God, ye have your fruit unto (the) sanctification, but (the) end is a life for ever:
6:23 for the wages of (the) sin is (the) death, but the grace of God is a life for ever in Christ Jesus our Lord.
7:1 Or know ye not, my brethren, for I spoke to them who know the law, that the law is lord over the man all time (that) he is living?
7:2 For the woman under husband is bound to her husband who liveth, in the law. But if the husband should die she is discharged (lit. done away with) from (the) law of the husband.
7:3 So then while the husband liveth they call her 'adulteress,' should she be with another husband; but if the husband should die, she is free from (the) law, not to be called adulteress,' should she be with another husband.
7:4 Wherefore then, my brethren, ye also died to (the) law through (the) body of Christ, to become (united) to another, that is to say, him who rose from them who are dead, that ye might bear fruit to God.
7:5 For we being in the flesh, the passions of the sins, those through the law, were working in our members (the) bearing fruit to (the) death.
7:6 But now we were discharged (lit. done away with) from (the) law, having died in that in which we were held, so that we might be servants in a newness of the spirit, and not in an oldness of [a] writing.
7:7 What then shall (lit. will) we say (The) law is (the) sin. It shall not be. But (the) sin I had not known, except I knew it through the law. For [the] lust I was not knowing, except (the) law said: Thou shalt not lust';
7:8 but (the) sin having taken an occasion through the commandment worked all lust in me: for without (the) law (the) sin was being dead.
7:9 But I was being alive once without the law. But the commandment having. come forth, (the) sin lived,
7:10 but I died; and the commandment was found (such that, being) intended for me unto (the) life, it (lit. this) became for me unto [a] death:
7:11 for (the) sin took an occasion through the commandment, deceived me, and killed me through it.
7:12 Wherefore (the) law indeed is holy, and the commandment is holy, and is just, and it is good.
7:13 The good then became for me unto [a] death. It shall not be. But it is (the) sin: that by means of the good, (the) sin might be manifested (as) working for me [a] death: that (the) sin might be more sinful (lit. sinner) through the commandment.
7:14 For we know indeed that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, having been sold under (the) sin.
7:15 For that which I work I know not: for not that which I wish is that (lit. this) which I do: but that which I hate I do.
7:16 If that which I wish not is that (lit. this) which I do, I assent to (lit. say with') the law, that it is good.
7:17 But now (it is) not I who work it, but it is (the) sin which dwelleth in me.
7:18 For I know that the good dwelleth not in me, that is to say, in my flesh: for the wish is present with me, but to work the good, not:
7:19 for not that which I wish, (the) good, is that (lit. this) which I do: but that which I wish not, (the) evil, is that which I do.
7:20 But if that which I (pron.) wish not is that (lit. this) which I do, then it is no more I who work it; but (the) sin it is which dwelleth in me.
7:21 I find then the law that which wisheth to do the good with me, (but) that the evil is present with me.
7:22 For I agree with the law of God according to the man which is within:
7:23 but I see another law in my members, armed against (the) law of my heart, taking me captive with (the) law of (the) sin which dwelleth in my members.
7:24 (The) wretched (the) man (that) I am! who will be able to save me from (the) body of this death ?
7:25 But thanks to God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. So then I in my heart indeed am servant to the law of God, but in my flesh I am servant to the law of (the) sin.
8:1 So then now there is no judgement to take them who are in Christ Jesus;
8:2 for the law of the spirit of (the) life in Christ Jesus made us free from the law of (the) sin and (the) death.
8:3 For (as for) the impotence of the law, with (lit. in) which it was being weak through the flesh,--God sent his Son in a likeness of flesh of (the) sin, and because of (the) sin he condemned (the) sin in (the) flesh:
8:4 that the justification of the law might be completed in us, namely, them who walk not according to flesh, but according to spirit.
8:5 For they who are according to flesh think the things of (the) flesh; but they who walk according to spirit think the things of the spirit.
8:6 For (the) thought of the flesh is (the) death; but (the) thought of the spirit is (the) life and [the] peace:
8:7 because (the) thought of the flesh is enmity unto God; for it is not subject to the law of God, nor is it possible for it:
8:8 but for them who are in (the) flesh it is not possible to please God.
8:9 But ye (pron ) were not being in (the) flesh, but in the spirit, if there is the (lit. a) spirit of God dwelling in you. But he in whom the spirit of Christ dwelleth not, that one (lit. this who is there) is not of him.
8:10 But if Christ (is) in you the body indeed is dead because of sin; but the spirit is [a] life because of [the] righteousness.
8:11 But if the spirit of him who raised Jesus from them who are dead dwelleth in you, then he who raised Christ Jesus from them who are dead shall make live your bodies also, which die, through his spirit which dwelleth in you.
8:12 So then, my brethren, we are not debtors to (lit. in) flesh to live according to flesh:
8:13 for if ye live according to flesh, ye will die; but if in the spirit ye kill the works of the body, ye will live.
8:14 For they who walk in the spirit of God, these are the sons of God.
8:15 For ye were not receiving a spirit of [a] servitude into [a] fear again; but ye received a spirit of [a] sonship, this in which ye cry: Abba [the] Father.'
8:16 And the spirit himself witnesseth with our spirit, that we (are) sons of God.
8:17 But if we (are) sons, then we (are) heirs also; heirs indeed of God, fellow heirs with (lit. of) Christ; if we suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him also.
8:18 For I think that the pains of this present time are not worthy of the glory which will be revealed to us.
8:19 For the expectation of the creation gazeth out forward to the revelation of the sons of God.
8:20 For the creation was subject to the vanity: it wisheth not, but (it is so) because of him who subjected it in a hope,
8:21 that the creation itself also will be free from the servitude of (the) corruption into the freedom of (the) glory of the sons of God.
8:22 For we know indeed that all the creation groaneth with us, and travaileth with us up to now.
8:23 But not only (so), but also we ourselves groan, having the firstfruit of the spirit, even we groan within us, looking out forward to the sonship, the redemption of our body.
8:24 For we were saved in [a] hope: but [a] hope which is seen is not [a] hope: for that which one seeth, he doth not wait for.
8:25 But if that which we see not we hope for, through [a] patience we look out for it.
8:26 But thus also the spirit helped our infirmity: for what prayer we shall (lit. will) make according as is right, we know not. But the spirit himself intercedeth exceedingly for us with (lit. in) unspeakable groaning;
8:27 but he who searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is (the) thought of the spirit, that he intercedeth unto God for the saints.
8:28 But we know that with them who love God he worketh in all good things,--them whom he called according to his foreordaining.
8:29 Because they whom he foreknew, these also he foreordained (to be) conformed to (the) image of his Son, to cause him to be the firstborn of many brethren.
8:30 But they whom he foreordained, these also (were) they whom he called: but they whom he called, these also he justified: but they whom he justified, these also he glorified.
8:31 What then shall (lit. will) we say against these things? If God is for us, who will be able to be against us?
8:32 He who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all, how then shall not he grant all things to us with him?
8:33 Who will be able to intercede against the elect of God? It is God who justifieth;
8:34 who will be able to condemn? Christ Jesus is (he) who died, but more, he rose from them who are dead, he who is set on (the) right hand of God, who himself intercedeth for us.
8:35 Who will be able to separate us from the love of Christ? [a, thus with all] tribulation is it, or hardship, or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?
8:36 According as it is written: 'For thee we are killed all the day; we were reckoned as sheep for (the) slaughter.'
8:37 But in all these things we conquer exceedingly through him who loved us.
8:38 For I am persuaded that neither (the) death, nor (the) life, nor angel, nor principality, 'nor the things which are, nor the things which will be, nor power,
8:39 nor height, nor depth, nor other creation--for none of them is it possible to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
9:1 (The) truth is that which I say in Christ, I say not falsehood; my conscience witnesseth with me unto me in the (lit. a) holy spirit,
9:2 that there is a great grief with me, and a compassion unfailing (lit. it is not wont to fail) in my heart.
9:3 For I (pron.) was praying to be accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to flesh:
9:4 who are Israelite; they, whose is the sonship, and the glory, and the covenants, and the establishment of the law, and the ministry, and the promises;
9:5 they, whose are the fathers, and they also--from them came Christ according to flesh, he who is set over all, God who (is) blessed for ever. Amen.
9:6 But thus the word of God fell not away. For not all who are from Israel, [these] are Israel:
9:7 neither then are seed (plur.) of Abraam all sons: but in Isaac shall a seed for thee be called (i e. invited).
9:8 That is to say, that the sons of (the) flesh--these are not the sons of God; but the sons of the promise will be reckoned for a seed.
9:9 For this word is that of a promise: 'According to this time I shall come, and a son shall be to Sarra.
9:10 But not only (so), but also (the) Erebekka as well, having conceived from one bed, of Isaac our father.
9:11 For when they were not yet born, nor yet had they done good or evil, that the choice which God ordained from (the) first might be permanent, being not from works, but from him who calleth,
9:12 it was said to her: The elder (lit. great) shall be servant to the younger (lit. little).'
9:13 According as it is written: Jacob indeed I loved, but Esau I hated.'
9:14 What then shall (lit. will) we say? Is there [a] wrongdoing with God? It shall not be.
9:15 For he saith to Moses: I shall (lit. will) have mercy on whom I shall (lit. will) have mercy, and I shall (lit. will) have compassion on whom I shall (lit. will) have compassion.'
9:16 So then it is not of him who wisheth, nor is it of him who runneth, but it is of God who hath mercy.
9:17 For the Scripture saith to Pharaō: 'Therefore I raised thee (up), that I might manifest my power in thee, and that my name might be declared over all the earth.'
9:18 So then on whom he wished he hath mercy, but whom he wished notes he hardeneth.
9:19 Thou wilt say then to me: Why findeth he fault? For who is going (lit. giving) against his counsel?'
9:20 Nay but, O man, who art thou who answerest against God? Shall the thing formed be able to say to him who formed it: Why madest thou me thus?'
9:21 Or hath not the potter authority over his clay, from the same lump to make a vessel, one indeed unto (the) honour, but another unto [a] dishonour?
9:22 But if God wished to manifest his anger, and to shew us his power, he endured (lit. brought) in a great longsuffering vessels of (the) anger, prepared unto (the) destruction:
9:23 that he might manifest the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, being those which he prepared before unto [a] glory,
9:24 that is to say us, namely them whom he invited, not only from the Jews, but also from the Gentiles.
9:25 As he saith also in Osee, I will call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which was As also he saith to Ōsie: I shall (lit. will) call him who is not my people, "My people;" and her who was not beloved, "She. was beloved."'not beloved.
9:26 And it shall be, in the place in which they said to them: Ye (are) not my people,' in that place they shall call them (the) sons of the living God.'
9:27 But Ēsaēas is crying out for Israel: If (the) number of (the) sons of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, (only) (the) remnant shall be saved:
9:28 for a word, completing it and cutting it off (is) that which the Lord will do upon (the) earth.'
9:29 And according as again Ēsaēas said: If the Lord Sabaōth had not left a seed to us, we should have been as Sodoma, and we should have been like to Gomorra.'
9:30 What then shall (lit. will) we say that the Gentiles (did)? Having pursued not [the] righteousness, they caught [the] righteousness, but the righteousness which is (lit, the) from (the) faith.
9:31 But Israel pursuing the law of [the] righteousness reached not the law.
9:32 Why? Because it is not from (the) faith, but as from works. They stumbled at the stone of stumbling; according as it is written:
9:33 Behold I shall (lit. will) set in Siōn a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence, and he who believeth him shall not be ashamed.'
10:1 My brethren, (the) good pleasure of my heart and my prayer which I make to God for them (is) unto [a] salvation.
10:2 For I witness to them that a zeal for God (it is) which is in them, but not according to [a] knowledge.
10:3 For being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own, they were not subject to the righteousness of God.
10:4 For (the) end of the law is Christ unto [a] righteousness to every one who believeth.
10:5 For Moses wrote that the righteousness which is from (the) law, (the) man who will do it shall live in it.
10:6 But the righteousness which is from (the) faith saith thus, Say not in thy heart: Who will be able to go up to (the) heaven?' That is to say, that he may bring Christ down:
10:7 or, Who will be able to go down to (the) abyss? That is to say, that he may bring Christ up from them who are dead.
10:8 But what saith the Scripture? The word is near thee; it is in thy mouth, and it is in thy heart, that is to say, (the) word of (the) faith which we proclaim,
10:9 that if thou shouldst confess with (lit. in, thus again) thy mouth, that Jesus is the Lord, and believe with thy heart that God raised him from them who are dead, thou shalt be saved:
10:10 for with the heart they believe him unto [a] righteousness, but with their mouth they confess him unto [a] salvation.
10:11 For the Scripture saith: Every one who believeth him shall not be ashamed.'
10:12 For there is no separation of the Jew and the Greek: for this Lord is of all, being rich to all who cry up toward him.
10:13 Every one who will pray (the) name of the Lord shall be saved.
10:14 How then will they pray him whom they believed not? But how will they believe on him whom they heard not? But how will they hear without him who proclaimeth?
10:15 But how will they proclaim unless they were sent? According as it is written: 'How beautiful are (the) feet of them who preach good tidings of the good (things).'
10:16 But all obeyed not the Gospel. For Ēsaāas saith: 'Lord, who believed our voice; and to whom was (the) arm of the Lord revealed ?
10:17 So (the) faith is from (the) bearing, but (the) hearing is through (the) word of Christ.
10:18 But I say: 'Heard they not?' Yea verily their sound went out over all (the) earth; and their words reached unto the end of the inhabited world.
10:19 But I say: `Did not Israel know?' first, Moses saith: I shall rouse your jealousy (lit. give zeal to you) by (lit. upon) that which is not a nation, by a senseless nation I shall cause you to be angry.'
10:20 But Esaeas is bold, and is saying: I was found by them who seek me not. I manifested myself unto them who ask me not.'
10:21 But he saith concerning Israe: I spread out my hands all the day toward a people disobedient, and they (masc. sing.) contradict (me).'
11:1 I say then, Did God forsake his people? It shall not be. For I also am an Israelite, from (the) seed of Abraam, (the) tribe of Benjamin.
11:2 God forsook not his people whom he foreknew. Or know ye not what the Scripture saith in Ēlias? How he interceded with God for Israel:
11:3 Lord, they killed thy prophets, they threw down thine altars: I alone was left; and they seek my life.'
11:4 But what saith the oracle to him? I left to me seven thousand men, these who bent not knee to the (fern.) Baal.
11:5 Thus also in this present time a remnant according to a choice of [a] grace existed.
11:6 But if in [a] grace, then it is not from works: otherwise the grace will not be grace any more.
11:7 What then (is) that? That which Israel sought, this he obtained not; but the chosen (lit. choice) acquired (it). But (the) rest were hardened of heart.
11:8 According as it is written: God gave to them a spirit of stupor, and eyes not to see, and ears not to hear until today.'
11:9 And David saith: Let their table be to them a snare and a trap and a stumblingblock and a retribution to them.
11:10 Let their eyes be darkened not to see; their back let it be bent (down) always.'
11:11 I say then, Did they stumble that they might fall? It shall not be: but in their transgression (the) salvation happened to the Gentiles, that they may rouse their jealousy.
11:12 If their transgression was the (lit. a) riches of the world, and their deficiency was riches of the Gentiles, then how great is their fulness?
11:13 But I say to you, namely the Gentiles. Moreover, so far as I am apostle of the Gentiles, I glorify my ministry:
11:14 that I may rouse the jealousy of my flesh, and save some of them.
11:15 For if their casting away made a reconciliation of the world, then what is their bringing in except (the) life from them who are dead?
11:16 But if the firstfruit (is) holy, then holy also is the lump: and if the root (is) holy, then holy also are the branches.
11:17 But if some from the branches were cut off, but thou, being from the bitter olive tree wert grafted in among them, and thou shared in (the) fatness of (the) root of the olive tree;
11:18 boast not thyself over the branches. But if thou indeed (pron.) boastest thyself, thou (art) not (that) which beareth the root, but the root (is that) which lifteth up thee.
11:19 Thou wilt say then, that some from the branches were cut off, that I indeed (pron.) might be grafted in.
11:20 Well; they were cut off in their unbelief, but thou indeed (pron.) standest in (the) faith. Be not proud, but fear.
11:21 For if God spared not the branches according to nature, neither thee also shall he spare.
11:22 See then the kindness and the severity of God: upon them indeed who fell [a] severity; but upon thee [a] kindness of God, if thou shouldst stay in the kindness: otherwise thou also wilt be cut off.
11:23 And the others, if they should not stay in the unbelief will be grafted in again.
11:24 If thou (pron.) wert cut away from the olive tree, bitter according to nature, and wert grafted in contrary to thy nature into the sweet olive tree, how much more may these he grafted in according to their nature into their own olive tree.
11:25 But I wish you not, my brethren, to be (lit. being) ignorant of this mystery, that ye may not become wise to yourselves only, that an hardening of heart happened to Israel in part, until (the) fulness of the Gentiles come in;
11:26 and thus all Israel shall be saved: according as it is written: He who will save shall come from Sion, he shall turn [the] unyodlinesses from Jacob.'
11:27 And this is my covenant which will be to them, when I should take away their sins.
11:28 According indeed to the Gospel they are enemies, because of you; but according to the choice they are beloved, because of their fathers,
11:29 for not repented of are the graces of God and the calling.
11:30 For as ye (pron.) were disobedient to God once, but now had mercy shown you in the disobedience of these,
11:31 thus these also now became disobedient with a view to your mercy, that these also now might have mercy shown them.
11:32 For God shut up all in (lit. into under) [a] disobedience, that he might have mercy upon all.
11:33 O (the) depth of the riches and the wisdom and the knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgements, and untraceable are his ways!
11:34 For who knew (the) heart of the Lord? Or who shared counsel with him?
11:35 Or who first gave to him, and he gave to him in 'exchange?
11:36 because from him, and through him, and into him are all things. His is the glory for ever. Amen.
12:1 But I beseech you, my brethren, through the compassions of God to present your bodies as a sacrifice living, holy, pleasing to God, and your reasonable worship, pleasing.
12:2 And that ye should no more share fashion with this age. But should change your form in a newness of the understanding, to prove what is (the) wish of God, the good which is pleasing and which is complete.
12:3 For I say through the grace which is given to me, to every one who is among you, not to think grandly beyond that which is right to think, but to think prudently, each one according as God divided to him a measure of faith.
12:4 For as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not one work:
12:5 thus we also, namely many, being one body in Christ, are each of us members of one another.
12:6 But having graces diversified according to (the) measure of the grace which is given to us. Whether [a] prophecy, according to the likeness of (the) faith;
12:7 or a ministry, in the ministry; or he who teacheth, in the (work of) teaching;
12:8 or he who exhorteth, in [the] persuasion; he who giveth, in [a] singleness of purpose: he who is in the foremost place, in [a] diligence; he who hath mercy, in [a] joy.
12:9 [The] love in which there is not hypocrisy. Fleeing from the evil, uniting yourselves to the good,
12:10 in [the] brotherly love being in [a] love toward one another, preferring one another above yourselves in [an] honour.
12:11 Being not slothful in [the] diligence, being fervent in the spirit, serving the Lord;
12:12 rejoicing in [the] hope, being patient in the tribulations, continuing in the prayer,
12:13 sharing towards the necessities of the saints, pursuing (the) hospitality.
12:14 Bless them who pursue you; bless, and curse not.
12:15 Rejoice with them who rejoice; and weep with them who weep.
12:16 Being of one mind (lit. thought) unto one another, and not thinking [the] proud things, but  walking with them who are humble. Be not wise to yourselves alone,
12:17 and render not an evil to any one for an evil; taking care for good things before all men.
12:18 If it is possible for you, do your (best) to be at peace with all men.
12:19 And avenge not yourselves, my beloved, but give place to (the) anger.     For it is written: (The) vengeance is mine; I shall (lit. will) repay, saith the Lord.'
12:20 But if thine enemy should hunger, feed him; if he should thirst, give him to drink: for doing this thou shalt gather coals of fire upon his head.
12:21 Let not the evil overcome you, but with the good overcome the evil.
13:1 Let all souls be subject unto the exalted authorities for there is no authority except them which are by God; those which are by God they are ordained.
13:2 Wherefore he who opposeth the authority, opposed the ordinance of God: but they who oppose them shall be judged.
13:3 For the rulers were being not for a fear to the good work, but to the evil. But thou wishest not to fear the authority, do the good, and an honour shall be to thee from it:
13:4 for a minister of God it is to thee unto the good. But if thou shouldst do the evil, fear; for it was not bearing the sword without cause: for a minister of God it is taking vengeance for (the) anger on him who doeth the evil.
13:5 Therefore it is necessary for you to be subject not only because of (the) anger, but also because of the conscience.
13:6 For therefore we pay tribute; for they are ministers of God continuing unto this work.
13:7 Give to all their dues: give the tribute to him of the tribute, give the custom to him of the custom: give the fear to him of the fear: give the honour to him of the honour.
13:8 Be not debtors for anything to any one, except to love one another. For he who loveth his neighbour, fulfilled the law.
13:9 For this: Thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not covet,' and all other commandments were completed in this saying, in (the) Love thy neighbour as thyself.
13:10 [The] love did not evil to its neighbour, (the) fulfilment then of the law is [the] love.
13:11 And this, knowing the time, that already is it the hour to make you rise from the sleep; but now approached to us our salvation (more) than (at) the time in which we believed.
13:12 The night advanced, but the day approached; let us then lay down the works of (the) darkness; but let us put on the arms of the light.
13:13 As being in the day let us walk, being seemly, not in revellings and drunkenness (plur.), not in beds and defilements, not in [a] strife and [a] jealousy.
13:14 But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take not care for the flesh in lusts.
14:1 He who is weak in (the) faith receive not in disputations of reasonings.
14:2 There is he who believeth indeed that he may (lit. to) eat everything; but he who is weak eateth herbs.
14:3 Let not him who eateth despise him who eateth not: let not him who eateth not judge him who eateth, for God received him..
14:4 Who art thou who judgest another man's (lit, of a stranger) servant? He is standing unto his lord, or is going to fall: but he is standing, for it is possible for the Lord to set him up.
14:5 For there is he indeed who judgeth day before day, but there is he who judgeth every day (alike). Let each one be persuaded in his own heart.
14:6 He who thought of the day, thought unto the Lord; and he who ate, ate to the Lord; for he giveth thanks to God: and he who eateth not, eateth not to the Lord, and giveth thanks to God.
14:7 For there is not any of us (who) will live to himself, and there is not any of us (who) will die to himself.
14:8 For if we shall (lit. will, thus again) live, we shall live to the Lord; but if we shall die, we shall die to the Lord: whether then we shall live or we shall die, we are those of the Lord.
14:9 Therefore Christ died and he lived, that he might be lord of them who are dead and them who live.
14:10 But why judgest thou thy brother? Nay, thou also, why despisest thou thy brother? for we all shall (lit. will) be made to stand before the judgement seat of God.
14:11 For it is written: I live, [I] saith the Lord, (and I swear) that every knee shall be bent to me, and every tongue confess to God.'
14:12 So then each one of us will give account for himself to God.
14:13 Judge not then any more one another; but judge this rather, not to set a stumbling-block or an offence for thy brother.
14:14 I know and I am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean through itself, except to him who thinketh of something that it is unclean, (then) to that one it is unclean.
14:15 For if because of [a] food thy brother was to be offended, then thou walkest not any more according to [a] love. Destroy not him for whom Christ died, with thy food.
14:16 Let not then your good be blasphemed:
14:17 for the kingdom of God was not being in [an] eating and [a] drinking; but it was in [a] righteousness, and [a] peace, and [a] joy in the (lit. a) holy spirit.
14:18 For he who serveth Christ in these things pleaseth God, and is upright among [the] men.
14:19 So then let us pursue the things of [the] peace, and the things of [the] edifying one another.
14:20 Pull not down the work of God because of [a] food. All things indeed are clean; but it is [an] evil to the man who will eat with offence.
14:21 It is good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, and that in which thy brother will stumble.
14:22 Thou (pronoun) hast [a] faith: let it (be) in thyself before God. Blessed is he who will not judge himself in that which he will approve.
14:23 But he who doubteth, if he should eat, he condemned himself, because it is not an (action) from [a] faith. But everything which is not an (action) from [a] faith is [a] sin.
15:1 But we (pronoun), namely they for whom it is possible, ought to bear the weaknesses of the powerless, and not to please ourselves.
15:2 Let each one of you please his neighbour in the good unto [an]
15:3 For Christ also pleased not himself; but (a.) according as it is written: The reproaches of them who reviled thee came upon me.
15:4 For all things which were written before were written for our instruction, that through [the] patience, and [the] comforting of the Scriptures [the] hope might be to us.
15:5 But God of [the] peace and [the] comforting shall give one mind to you one with another according to Jesus Christ:
15:6 that in one heart and one mouth ye may glorify God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
15:7 Therefore receive one another according as Christ also received you unto [a] glory of God.
15:8 For I say that Christ became a minister of (the) circumcision for the truth of God; that he might confirm the promises of the fathers;
15:9 but (for) the Gentiles because of [a] mercy to glorify God. According as it is written: 'Therefore I shall (lit. will) confess thee among the Gentiles, and I shall (lit. will) sing praise unto thy name.
15:10 And he saith again: Delight yourselves, [the] Gentiles, with his people.'
15:11 And he saith again: 'All the Gentiles bless the Lord; let all the peoples bless him.'
15:12 And Ēsaēas saith again: (The) root of Jesse shall be, and he who will rise to rule the Gentiles, the Gentiles shall hope in him.'
15:13 But God of [the] hope shall fill you with all joy and [the] peace in (the) causing you to believe, abounding in [the] hope, in [the] power of the holy spirit.
15:14 I also, my brethren, am persuaded about you, that ye also are full of every good thing, being full of all knowledge, it being possible for you to teach one another.
15:15 But boldly I wrote to you in part, as reminding you concerning the grace which was given to me from God;
15:16 to cause me to become minister of Jesus Christ unto the Gentiles, working in a priesthood unto the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be received and sanctified in the (lit. a) holy spirit.
15:17 I have a boasting in Christ Jesus towards God.
15:18 For I shall not dare to say a word of (lit. in) the things in which Christ worked not through me unto an obedience of the Gentiles, in (the) word, in (the) work,
15:19 in (the) power of signs and wonders, in [a] power of the (lit. a) holy spirit, so that from Jerusalem and its neighbourhood even unto [the] Allyrikon I filled them with the of Christ.
15:20 But thus I was loving to preach good tidings where (the) name of Christ was not said, that I might not build upon another man's (lit. a stranger) foundation;
15:21 but according as it is written: They who were not shown concerning him shall see, and they who heard not shall understand.'
15:22 Therefore I was prevented many times from coming to you:
15:23 but now I have no place in these parts, but there is (indeed) a longing in me to come to you since many years:
15:24 when I shall (lit. will) go to [the] Spania. For I hope to see you, being about to go thither; and that ye may escort me thither, if I should be satisfied with you somewhat.
15:25 But now I shall (lit. will) go to Jerusalem to minister to the saints.
15:26 For they of (the) Macedonia and Achaia were well pleased to make a common offering unto the poor of the saints who are in Jerusalem.
15:27 For they were well pleased (to do it), and the others (lit. they) are their debtors.     For if the Gentiles share with them in a spiritual (thing), they ought to minister to them in the carnal (things) also:
15:28 should I then fulfil this, and seal this fruit to them, I shall go through you unto [the] Spania.
15:29 But I know that I came to you, I came in a fulness of blessing of Christ.
15:30 I beseech you, then, my brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the love of the spirit, to strive with me in your prayers for me to God;
15:31 that I may be saved from them who are disobedient in [the] Judea; and my ministry unto Jerusalem, that it may be acceptable unto the saints,
15:32 that I should come to you in [a] joy through the will of God, and rest myself with you.
15:33 But God of [the] peace is with you all. Amen.
16:1 But I commend Phoibē our sister unto you, who is also a minister of the church, which is in Kenkhrees,
16:2 that ye may receive her in the Lord in (the) worthiness of the saints, and help her in all things in which she will have need of you: for she also herself protected many, and me also.
16:3 Salute Priskylla and Akylla my fellow-workers in Christ Jesus,
16:4 these who gave their necks for my life, these to whom not I only give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles: and the church of their house.
16:5 Salute Epenetos my beloved, who himself is the beginning of [the] Asia in the Lord.
16:6 Salute Maria, who has spent (lit, taken) much toil on you.
16:7 Salute Andronikos and Joulia, my kinsfolk, and my fellow prisoners, who are known among the apostles, these who are prior to me in Christ.
16:8 Salute Ampliatos my beloved in the Lord.
16:9 Salute Ourbanos, our fellow-worker in Christ, and Stachēs my beloved.
16:10 Salute Apellēs the chosen in Christ. Salute them who are from Aristoboulos.
16:11 Salute Ērōdion my kinsman. Salute them who are from those of Narkysos, who are in Christ.
16:12 Salute Triphōna and Tryphōsa, who toiled in the Lord. Salute Persida the beloved, who spent (lit. took) much toil in the Lord.
16:13 Salute Rouphos the chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine also is she.
16:14 Salute Asynkritos, Phlāgonta, Ermā, Patroba, Erma, and the brethren also who are with them.
16:15 Salute Phylologos and Joulia, Nerea and his sister, and Olympan, and all the saints who are with them.
16:16 Salute ye one another in a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ salute you.
16:17 I beseech you, my brethren, to observe them who make the separations and the scandals contrary to (lit. away from) the teaching which ye learned, and turn away from them.
16:18 For such are not servants of our Lord Jesus Christ, but of their belly; and through their sweet speaking and their blessing they deceive (the) heart of the innocent.
16:19 For your obedience went (forth) unto all. I rejoice then over you: but I wish you to be wise in the good, but simple for the evil.
16:20 But God of [the] peace shall crush Satan under your feet quickly. (The) grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with you.
16:21 Saluteth you Timotheos my fellow-worker, and Loukios and Jassōn and Sōsipatros my kinsman.
16:22 I salute you, I Tertios, who wrote this epistle in the Lord.
16:23 Saluteth you Gaios my host and all the church. Saluteth you Arastos the treasurer of the city, and Kouartos the brother.
16:24 (24)
16:25 He for whom it is possible to confirm you according to my Gospel, and the proclaiming of Christ Jesus according to a revelation of a mystery, having been kept in silence for eternal times,
16:26 but now it appeared through the Scriptures of the prophets, according to the command of God the eternal (lit. for ever), having been manifested unto [an] obedience of (the) faith among all the Gentiles,
16:27 the one only the wise God, through Jesus Christ, he (lit. this) whose is the glory unto age of the ages. Amen.
16:28 