1:2 Paul and Timotheos, the servants of Christ Jesus, to all the saints who are in Christ Jesus who are in Philippois, with the bishops and the deacons:
1:3 (the) grace to you and (the) peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:4 I give thanks to my God for all your remembrance
1:5 which I make always in all my prayers for you all in [a] joy making the prayer
1:6 for your fellowship which was with the Gospel from the first day up to now;
1:7 being persuaded about this, that he who began in you will complete a good work unto the day of Jesus Christ.
1:8 According as it is a righteous work for me to think this about you all, because that ye are in my heart; and in my bonds, and in my defence and (the) confirMatthewion of the Gospel ye all are sharing the grace with me.
1:9 For God is my witness, how I love you all in the tender mercies of Jesus Christ.
1:10 And this is that concerning which I pray, that your love yet more and more may abound in (the) knowledge and all discernment;
1:11 to cause you to prove the things which are profitable; that ye might be sincere and offenceless unto (the) day of Christ;
1:12 and being full of fruit of [the] righteousness which is (lit. the) through Jesus Christ, unto [a] glory and [an] honour of God.
1:13 But I wish to cause you to know, my brethren, that the things which happened to me came more unto an advance of the Gospel;
1:14 so that my bonds became manifested in all the Pretorion and all the rest;
1:15 and most (lit. (the) more) of the brethren who are in the Lord trust to my bonds, and dare much more to speak the word of God fearlessly.
1:16 And some indeed because of [an] envy and [a] strife; but some also because of [a] good-will proclaim Christ:
1:17 these indeed in [a] love, knowing that I am set for a defence of the Gospel:
1:18 but the others (lit. these) in [a] strife proclaim Christ not sincerely, thinking to raise [a] tribulation for my bonds.
1:19 What then? Nevertheless in every form, whether in [a] pretence or in [a] truth, Christ is proclaimed; in this I rejoice, but also I shall rejoice still.
1:20 For I know that this will happen to me unto [a] salvation, through your prayer and (the) supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ,
1:21 according to my looking and my hope, that I shall (lit. will) not be ashamed in anything, but in all boldness, as always, now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether through (the) life or through (the) death.
1:22 For to me (lit. I) Christ is my life, and (the) death is [a] gain to me.
1:23 If the life in (the) flesh, this is a fruit of work to me: and what I shall (lit. will) choose I know not.
1:24 The two (things) lay hold on me, having (the) desire to be dissolved, that I may be with Christ; for much (lit. more) rather is that (lit. it is) chosen:
1:25 but the abiding in (the) flesh is more necessary because of you.
1:26 And (of) this being persuaded, I know that I shall (lit. will) stay, and I shall (lit. will) abide with (lit. to) you all, unto your advance and (the) joy of the faith;
1:27 that your boast may abound in Christ Jesus in me through my coming to you again.
1:28 Only behave as citizens worthily of the Gospel of Christ: that, should I come and see you, or being not with you, I may hear concerning you, that ye stand in one spirit, one soul, sharing toil in the faith of the Gospel;
1:29 and not frightened in anything by them who are against you; these whose manifestation is [a] destruction to them, but to you is [a] salvation, and this is from God;
1:30 because it was granted to you for Christ not only to believe him, but to suffer also for him:
1:31 Having the same conflict as ye saw in me, and now also ye hear in me.
2:1 (As to) being of good courage in (lit. conquest of heart of) Christ, (as to) that which is [a] confidence of [a] love, that which is a fellowship of [a] spirit, that which is [an] affection and [a] compassion,
2:2 fill up my joy, that ye may have one thought, it being the same love which ye have, sharing in soul, being of one heart.
2:3 Not doing anything in [a] strife, nor in [a] love of vain glory, but in the humbleness of heart esteeming one another as surpassing yourselves;
2:4 each one of you not observing your own things only, but also the things of one another. Let each one of you
2:5 think this in yourselves, which is that which is in Christ Jesus,
2:6 who, existing in [a] form of God, not a robbing thought it to be [an] equal with God;
2:7 but he emptied himself; he took [a] form of servant, having been made in [a] likeness of man; having been found in [a] fashion as a man,
2:8 he humiliated himself, having become obedient up to (the) death, but a death of a cross..
2:9 Therefore God abundantly exalted him, and granted to him the name which is exalted above every name;
2:10 that in (the) name of Jesus every knee should bend--the things of (the) heaven and the things of (the) earth and the things of those which are below (the) earth,
2:11 and that every tongue should confess that the Lord (is) Jesus Christ, -unto [a] glory of God the Father.
2:12 Wherefore, my beloved, according as ye were obedient always, not in my coming to you only, but now much rather, being not with you, in [a] fear and [a] trembling work your salvation;
2:13 for God is he who worketh in you unto wishing and the working, for the good pleasure.
2:14 Work all things without murmuring and reasoning;
2:15 that ye may be blameless and harmless children of God, Holy in (the) midst of a generation bent and perverse, among whom ye are manifested as luminaries in the world,
2:16 laying hold on the word of (the) life, unto a boast for me at (the) day of Christ; that I was not running emptily, nor toiled I unto that which is empty.
2:17 But if I shall (lit. will) even be poured out as a libation upon the sacrifice and the ministering of your faith, I rejoice and I share in rejoicing with you all:
2:18 but in this rejoice ye also and share in rejoicing with me.
2:19 But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send to you Timotheos quickly, that I also may be at rest in my heart should I know concerning your state.
2:20 For there is not any (other) of mine agreeable to my soul who will take care for you (lit. take your care) sincerely.
2:21 For they all seek for their own things, and not the things of Christ Jesus.
2:22 But ye know his proof that as a child to a father he was servant with me unto the Gospel.
2:23 Him (lit. this) indeed then I hope to send, if I should know immediately concerning my affairs:
2:24 but I am persuaded in the Lord that I (pron.) shall (lit, will) come to you quickly.
2:25 But I thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditos, the brother and the fellow-worker and my fellow-soldier, but being apostle to you and minister of my need;
2:26 since he was loving to see you all, and he was grieving, because that ye heard that he was sick:
2:27 for indeed he was sick until he was near unto (the) death. And God had mercy on him; but not only on him, but on me also, that I might not take grief upon grief again.
2:28 More hastily, then, I sent him, that, should ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I also may be without grief.
2:29 Receive him, then, in the Lord in all joy; and let such be honoured by you:
2:30 because concerning the work of the Lord he was near up to (the) death, having risked his life, that he might fill up your deficiency of the service, which befell me.
3:1 Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write these things again to you, is not 'indeed irksome for me, to you it is confirming.
3:2 Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workers, beware of the a concision:
3:3 for we are the circumcision, namely they who minister the spirit of God, and boasting ourselves in Christ Jesus; and we were not trusting in (the) flesh.
3:4 Although I (pron.) have a confidence in (the) flesh also: if another thinketh to trust in (the) flesh, I the more am (trusting):
3:5 [a] circumcision on (the) eighth day, from (the) race of Israel, (the) tribe of Benjamin, a: Hebrew from Hebrews; according to the law I (am) a Pharisee,
3:6 according to [a] zeal I persecuted the church, according to the righteousness which is in the law I was blameless.
3:7 But the things which were being to me gains, these I reckoned to me a loss because of Christ.
3:8 But moreover I reckon them all losses because of the excellence of (the) knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, This (one) for whom I lost all things, and I reckon them all rubbish, that I might gain Christ,
3:9 and be found in him, not having my righteousness, that (lit. the) from the law, but that from (the) faith of Christ, But the righteousness [the] from God upon (the) faith:
3:10 to cause me to know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his pains, changing myself into form with his death;
3:11 that perhaps I may attain unto (the) resurrection of the dead.
3:12 Not that I have obtained, or I was already completed: but I run, that perhaps I may apprehend in that (lit. this) in which I was apprehended by Jesus Christ.
3:13 My brethren, I (pron.) think not of myself that I have apprehended: but one (thing),--I am forgetting indeed the things behind, but I am stretching myself unto the things before
3:14 with an expectation I am running for the palm of the high calling of God which is in Christ Jesus.
3:15 Let every one who is completed think this of himself: and if ye think another thing in another way, this also will God reveal to you:
3:16 nevertheless that unto which we reached, with this let us be consistent.
3:17 Be ye sharers of likeness to me, my brethren, and look at them who walk thus, according as we are an example to you.
3:18 For there are many (who) walked, these concerning whom I said to you many times, and now again weeping I say--the enemies of the cross of Christ:
3:19 these whose end is (the) destruction, these whose god is their belly; and their glory was in a shame: these who think the things of (the) earth.
3:20 For our (pron.) citizenship was in the heavens; and from there we look forward to our saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ:
3:21 who will change (the) body of our humiliation in conformity with (the) body of his glory, according to the working to have power and to make all things subject to him.
4:1 Wherefore, my brethren dear and beloved, my joy and my crown, thus stand in the Lord, my beloved.
4:2 Euodia I beseech and Syntychē to think the same thing in the Lord.
4:3 Yea, I beseech thee also, [the] chosen yokefellow, help them, these who toiled with me in the Gospel, with Klementos also, and (the) rest of my fellow-workers, these whose name is written on (the) book of (the) life.
4:4 Rejoice in the Lord always: again I say, 'Rejoice.'
4:5 Let your moderation be manifest to every man. The Lord is near.
4:6 Take not care; but in everything the supplication and the prayer in [a] thanksgiving,--let your requests be manifested unto God.
4:7 And the peace of God, which is higher than all intelligence, shall keep your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.
4:8 Finally, my brethren, the things which are true, the things which are reverend, the things which are just, the things which are pure; all things in [a] love, all things of good tidings; that which is [a] virtue, and that which is [an] honour, think on these,
4:9 which are those (lit. these) which ye learned and ye received and ye heard and ye saw in me--these things do: and God of [the] peace shall be with you.
4:10 But I rejoiced greatly in the Lord' that now ye put forth at length a thought concerning me; in that which ye thought, but the time was not being favourable to you.
4:11 Not that I said (it) with reference to a being in want: for I (pron.) knew, in the things in which I am, to be content.
4:12 I know how to be humiliated, I know how to abound in everything; I am taught also in them all both to be satisfied and to hunger, both to abound and to be in want.
4:13 I have power in everything by (lit. in) him who encourageth me.
4:14 Nevertheless ye did well, having shared in my tribulation.
4:15 But ye know also [the] Philippians, that in (the) beginning of the Gospel, I having come from (the) Makedonia, none among the churches shared with me in a receiving and a giving except you only;
4:16 Because in Thessalonikē also once and twice ye sent to me for my need.
4:17 Not that I sought for the gift; but I sought for the fruit which aboundeth unto your work.
4:18 But I received all things, and I abounded: I was filled, having received from Epaphroditos the things which are yours, as an odour of fragrance, as a sacrifice acceptable, pleasing to God.
4:19 But my God shall fill up to you every need according to his riches in [a] glory in Christ Jesus.
4:20 But God and our Father, his be the glory unto age of the ages. Amēn.
4:21 Salute every saint in Christ Jesus.
4:22 All the brethren who are with me salute you. All the saints salute you, especially they (lit. the) from (the) house of (the) king.
4:23 (The) grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with your spirit, my brethren. Amēn.
4:24