1:2 In many manners and many forms from (the) beginning God spake to our fathers from the prophets,
1:3 but at (the) end of these days he spake to us in a Son, he whom he appointed heir of all, and through him he made the ages;
1:4 who himself is the splendour of his glory, and (the) form of his substance, upholding (the) universe by (the) word of his power. Through him he made a cleansing of the sins. He sat on the right hand of the greatness on high;
1:5 having become better than the angels by so much, as he inherited a name being different from them.
1:6 For to whom at any time among the angels said he: 'Thou art my Son, I (pron.) begat thee to-day'? and again: 'I (pron.) shall be to him a Father, and he (pron.) shall be to me for a Son'?
1:7 But when again he bringeth the firstborn into the world, he is saying: Let the angels of God all worship him.'
1:8 And concerning the angels he saith: He who made his angels spirits and his ministers a flame of fire.'
1:9 But concerning (the) Son he saith: Thy throne, (O) God, unto age of the age, and (the) staff of (the) straightness is (the) staff of thy kingdom.
1:10 Because thou lovedst [the] righteousness and thou hatedst (the) injustice, therefore God, thy God, anointed thee with an oil of gladness rather than they who are thy fellows'
1:11 And, From (the) beginning, Lord, thou (pron.) laidest foundation of (the) earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands.
1:12 They (pron.) will perish, but thou (pron.) abidest, and they all will become old as a garment:
1:13 as a cloke thou wilt roll them up, and they will be changed, but thou art thou, and thy years fail not.
1:14 For to whom at any time among the angels said he: Sit on my right hand, until I put thine enemies below thy feet?'
1:15 Are not all these ministering spirits, sent unto a service because of them who will inherit [a] salvation?
2:1 Therefore it is right that we should give more heed to the things which we heard, lest haply we decline from (them).
2:2 For if the word which he spake through the angels became established, and every transgression and every disobedience received a recompence in a worthy judgement;
2:3 how shall (lit. will) we (pron.) be able to escape, should we neglect this great salvation? That which took beginning of being spoken about through the Lord by them who heard, and it was confirmed unto us;
2:4 God witnessing with them, in signs and wonders and powers of many kinds, and distributions of the holy spirit according to his will.
2:5 For he made not the world subject to the angels, that which cometh, this concerning which we speak.
2:6 For one somewhere witnessed to us, saying: 'Who is (the) man, that thou rememberedst him, or (the) son of (the) man, that thou visitedst him?
2:7 Thou humiliatedst him a little (lower) than the angels; (the) glory and (the) honour thou gavest as a crown upon him.
2:8 And thou settest him up over the works of thy hands: thou madest all things subject below his feet.' For having made all things subject to him, then he left not anything without being subject to him. But now we see not yet all things subjected to him.
2:9 But he whom he humiliated a little (lower) than the angels--we see Jesus, because of the pain of (the) death he put (lit. did the) glory and (the) honour as (ft) a crown upon him, that in the grace of God he might taste (the) death for all.
2:10 For it was being worthy for him because of whom were all things and through whom were all things, having brought many sons into [a] glory, even (the) author of their salvation, to be completed through pains.
2:11 For he who sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all from one: therefore he is not ashamed calling them, My brethren.'
2:12 Saying: I shall (lit. will) say thy name to my brethren, in (the) midst of the church I shall (lit. will) bless thee.
2:13 And he saith again: I shall be trusting in him.' And again he saith also (on): Behold, I and the children whom God gave to me.'
2:14 Since then the children shared in blood and flesh, so he also shared in such things; that through his death he might do away with him who had (the) strength of (the) death, who is the devil,
2:15 and might restore these. They who being in the fear of (the) death were incurring [a] servitude all their lifetime.
2:16 For he put (lit. threw) not his hand unto angels [together], but (the) seed of Abraam (is) that unto which he put his hand.
2:17 Therefore it is worthy that he should be like to his brethren in all things, that he might be merciful and high priest faithful toward God, for him to forgive the sins of the people.
2:18 For in that in which he suffered and which he was tempted, it is possible for him to help them who are tempted.
3:1 Therefore, my brethren, holy, and sharing in the calling of (the) heaven, consider the apostle and high priest of our confession, Jesus;
3:2 he who was faithful to him who made him, according as also Moses over his house.
3:3 For this (one) was worthy of more honour than Moses, according as he who made it hath more honour than the house.
3:4 For all houses are prepared by (some) one, but he who made all things is God.
3:5 And Moses indeed is faithful in all his house as a servant unto a witnessing of the things which are spoken;
3:6 but Christ as a Son over his house; whose house are we, if we should lay hold on the boldness and the boast of the hope firm unto the end.
3:7 According as the holy spirit saith: 'To-day, if ye should hear his voice,
3:8 let not your hearts harden, as in the anger, according to the day of the temptation in (the) desert,
3:9 that in which your fathers tempted me in a probation; they saw my works
3:10 forty years. Therefore I hated that generation, and I said that they go astray in their heart always: but they (pron.) knew not my ways;
3:11 as I sware in mine anger: "Will they go into my rest?"'
3:12 Take heed, my brethren, lest haply there should be an evil heart in one of you of unbelief to make you withdraw from the living God:
3:13 but comfort one another daily, as long as it is called 'To-day,' that one of you might not be hardened in a deceit of (the) sin.
3:14 For we were sharers of Christ if we should lay hold on (the) beginning of the confidence firm unto the end:
3:15 in (the) saying 'To-day, if ye should hear his voice, let not your hearts harden, as in the anger,'
3:16 for some having heard caused anger, but not all who came out of Khēmi through Moses.
3:17 But who were they with whom he was displeased forty years? Was it not they who sinned, whose limbs fell in (the) desert?
3:18 But who were they to whom he sware not to come into his rest? Was it not they who were disobedient?
3:19 And we see that they could not come in because of their unbelief.
4:1 Let us then fear lest haply, a promise having been left for coming into his rest, one of you seem to come short.
4:2 For good tidings were preached to us also as to those, but the word of the hearing profited those not, because they were not persuaded in the faith with those who heard.
4:3 We shall (lit. will) then go into the rest, namely they who believed, according as be said: As I sware in mine anger, "Shall they go into my rest?"' although the works were done from (the) foundation of the world.
4:4 For he said thus in a place concerning the seventh day: God rested in the seventh day from all his works';
4:5 and in this (place) again: 'Will they go into my rest ?'
4:6 Since then he leaveth some to come into it, and the first to whom good tidings were preached went not in because of their unbelief,
4:7 again he ordaineth a day, to-day, in David, after so much time, saying according as he said from (the) first: 'To-day, if ye should hear his voice, let not your hearts harden.'
4:8 For had Jēsou made them rest, he would not have spoken concerning another day after these things.
4:9 So then a keeping of Sabbath is left to the people of God.
4:10 For he who came into his rest, himself also rested from his works, as God rested from his own.
4:11 Let us hasten then to come into that rest, that one may not fall down in the same form of the disobedience.
4:12 For the word of God is faithful, and it worketh, and it is sharper than every sword of two edges (lit. mouth), and it goeth in up to the dividing of the soul and the spirit, and the joints and the marrow, and it is searching for the reasonings and the thoughts of heart.
4:13 And there is not any creature hidden before him, but all are naked, and they are with bare neck before his eyes, he unto whom the word reacheth for us.
4:14 Having then a great high priest who passed (through) the heavens, Jesus (the) Son of God, let us lay hold on the confession.
4:15 For (it is) not an high priest which we have, for whom it is not possible to suffer with our weaknesses; but (one) who was tempted in everything according to our form, without sin.
4:16 Let us come in boldly before the throne of the grace, that we may receive [a] mercy and find [a] grace for an occasion of help.
5:1 For every high priest who is taken from [the] men, they set him up for [the] men with God, that he may offer gift and sacrifice for the sins;
5:2 (one) for whom it is possible to suffer in a measure with the ignorant and who are gone astray, because himself also is in [a] weakness;
5:3 and because of it it is meet for him, according as he offereth for the things of the people, thus also that he should offer for his own sins.
5:4 And (any) one taketh not the honour to himself, but God called him according as Aaron.
5:5 Thus also Christ glorified not himself, to be made (an) high priest, but he it is who spake to him: 'Thou art my Son, I (pron.) begat thee to-day.'
5:6 According as he saith in another place: Thou art (the) priest for ever, according to (the) order of Melchisedek.'
5:7 He who offered in the days of his flesh prayers and supplications to him for whom it was possible to save him from (the) death; with a strong cry and tears having offered them: and he heard him from (the) fear.
5:8 Though he was a son, he knew [the] obedience from the pains which he received;
5:9 and having been completed, he became to all who will obey him a cause of eternal salvation;
5:10 God having called him 'High priest for ever, according to (the) order of Melchisedek.'
5:11 He concerning whom the word is great for us, and it is difficult of interpretation, because ye become weak in your hearings.
5:12 For (when) it even was being worthy for you to be teachers because of the time; ye again have need of (one) to teach you what are the elements of (the) beginning of the words of God; and ye become having need of [a] milk, not [a] strong food.
5:13 For every one who eateth milk is not experienced in (the) word of the righteousness; for he is a child.
5:14 But the strong food is that of the perfect, they who because of their habit have their perception (plur.) experienced for (the) knowing (the) difference of the good and the evil.
6:1 Therefore having left (the) word of (the) beginning of Christ, let us come unto the completion, not having deposited for us a foundation of [a] repentance from dead works, and [a] faith in God,
6:2 and [a] doctrine of baptisms, and [a] laying on of hand upon them, and [a] resurrection of the dead, and [an] eternal judgement.
6:3 And this we shall do if the Lord should command.
6:4 For it is an impossibility (for them) who once received (the) light, having tasted free gift of (the) heaven, and they shared in the holy spirit,
6:5 and they tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age which cometh,
6:6 and fell (away), that they should become new again unto a repentance, crucifying (the) Son of God to themselves once more, they make him as public example.
6:7 For the earth which drinketh the rain which cometh down upon it many times, bearing [a] grass good for them for whom it was cultivated, receiveth the blessing of God:
6:8 but should it bring forth thorns and thistles it is unprofitable, and draweth near unto (the) curse, whose end will be unto (the) burning.
6:9 But we are persuaded concerning you, my beloved, as to the things which are best and the things which draw near unto [the] salvation, even if we thus make (the) speech:
6:10 for God is not a wrongdoer, that he should forget your work and (the) toil of your love, this which ye manifested in his name, having ministered to the saints, and ye minister still.
6:11 But we wish that each one of you may manifest the same diligence in (the) fulfilment of this hope unto (the) last:
6:12 that ye be not weak, but that ye be like to them who inherited the promises through (the) faith and [the] longsuffering.
6:13 For God having promised to Abraam, since there was not another exalted (one) to swear by him, he sware by himself,
6:14 saying: In a blessing I shall (lit. will) bless thee, and in a multiplying I shall (lit. will) cause thy seed to multiply.'
6:15 And thus having suffered long he obtained the promise.
6:16 For indeed [the] men swear by the greater than them: and (the) finishing of all controversy (for) a confirMatthewion to them is the oath.
6:17 But in this, God wishing the more to show to the heirs of the promise the immoveability of his counsel, mediated in an oath:
6:18 that, through two immoveable things, [these] in which it was not possible that God should say falsehood, we might have a strong comfort, namely those who fled to him to lay hold on the hope which is set before us.
6:19 This which we have as an anchor of our soul, being unfailing and firm and going in unto the things which are within the veil;
6:20 the place into which Jesus went in, being (the) forerunner for us, having become an high priest for ever according to (the) order of Melchisedek.
7:1 For this Melchisedek, (the) king of Salēm, the priest of God most high, he who met Abraam returning from (the) slaughter of the kings, and he blessed him,
7:2 to whom Abraam divided (a) tenth from everything of his,-first indeed being interpreted, (the) king of [the] righteousness'; after it, '(the) king of Salēm,' that is to say, '(the) king of [the] peace';
7:3 fatherless, motherless (he) is, not a word as to generation is (there) of his; he hath not beginning of day, nor hath he end of life; but he is likened unto (the) Son of God; he remaineth priest for ever.
7:4 But see how great is this (one), to whom Abraam gave (a) tenth from the choice things of his, the patriarch.
7:5 And they indeed from the sons of Levi, about to receive the priesthood, have commandment delivered unto them to receive (a) tenth from the people according to the law, who are their brethren, although they came from the loins of Abraam:
7:6 for he whose generation from them was not spoken of, received (a) tenth from Abraam, and he blessed him who had the promises.
7:7 But without all controversy the little is blessed by the greater than him.
7:8 And here men who die receive tenths; but there it is witnessed of him that he liveth.
7:9 And as to say a word, because of Abraam, Levi also indeed, who was (to) receive tenths, gave (a) tenth;
7:10 for he was yet in the loins of Abraam when Melehisedek met him.
7:11 If indeed then (the) completion was being through the priesthood of the Levite; for law was given to the people in its time; then what was (the) need for there to be another priest according to (the) order of Melchisedek, and not to say, 'According to (the) order of Aaron?'
7:12 For the priesthood being about to be removed, necessarily there is a removing of the law also.
7:13 For he concerning whom these things are said belonged to another tribe, that (lit. this) from which no one attended at the altar.
7:14 For it is manifest from (the) first, that our Lord sprang from Jouda; that tribe from which Moses said not anything concerning priest.
7:15 And it is yet even the more manifested, if according to (the) form of Melchisedek will arise another priest.
7:16 He who was made not according to a law of a carnal commandment, but according to a power of an indissoluble life.
7:17 For it is witnessed of him: 'Thou art (the) priest for ever, according to (the) order of Melchisedek.'
7:18 For indeed there will be a rejection of the first commandment because of its weakness and its unprofitableness,
7:19 for the law completed not anything. A way of coming in is this, of a better (lit. chosen) hope, this through which we shall (lit. will) draw near unto God;
7:20 and according as it is not without oath. For those indeed were made priest without oath,
7:21 but this one indeed with an oath through him who saith to him: The Lord sware and shall not repent, "Thou art (the) priest for ever."'
7:22 According to so much was made Jesus (the) surety of a better (lit. chosen) covenant which was established with law upon better (chosen) promises.
7:23 And they indeed were made priest, being many (of them), because (the) death was not letting them stay.
7:24 But this (one) because he will stay for ever received the priesthood without passing to another.
7:25 Therefore it is possible for him to save always them who come to God through him. Living always to intercede for them.
7:26 For an high priest of this kind was being comely for us, honourable, without evil, undefiled, separated from the sinners; and he was exalted above the heavens.
7:27 He for whom there is not [given] necessity (to offer) daily as the high priests who offer sacrifice first for their own sins, after it they offer for those of the people: for this he did, having offered himself once.
7:28 For the law appointeth men as high priest, they having weakness; but the word of the oath, this which was after the law, setteth up a Son completed for ever.
8:1 But (the) summing up of the things which we say (is this). For an high priest of this kind we have, he who sat (down) at the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens,
8:2 as minister of the holy things, and of the true tabernacle which the Lord made firm, and not man.
8:3 For every high priest is appointed to offer gift and sacrifice: therefore it is necessary for there to be something for this (one) to offer.
8:4 If indeed then he was being on (the) earth, then he would (lit. was) not be a priest, there being those who offer gift according to the law;
8:5 these who minister in a form and a shadow of the things of (the) heaven, according as it was shown to Moses, being about to complete the tabernacle: for, See, he said, thou shalt make all things according to the pattern which was shown to thee on the mountain.
8:6 But now he acquired a service much better, as also he is mediator of a better covenant, which was established with law upon better promises.
8:7 For had that first one been faultless, (the) place of the second would not have been sought for.
8:8 For he is finding. fault with them, saying: 'Lo, days come, said the Lord, I shall (lit. will) complete upon (the) house of Israel and upon (the) house of Jouda a new covenant;
8:9 not according to the covenant which I established with their fathers in the day (in) which I took hold of their hand to bring them out of (the) land of Chēmi; because they (pron.) stayed not in my covenant, but I (pron.) neglected them, said the Lord.
8:10 Because this is my covenant which I shall (lit. will) establish with (the) house of Israel after those days, said the Lord; I shall put (lit. give) my laws upon their thoughts, and I shall write them upon their hearts: and I (pron.) shall be to them as God, and they also shall be to me for a people:
8:11 and each one shall not teach his (fellow) citizen, and each one his brother, saying: "Know the Lord": because they will all know me from their little one to their great one.
8:12 Because I shall (lit. will) forgive them their wrongdoing, and I shall not remember more their sins.'
8:13 In (the) saying 'new,' then he made the first old. But that which becometh old and becometh aged clraweth near unto (the) perishing.
9:1 The first indeed then (was) having ordinances of ministry and a holy (place) of ornament.
9:2 For the first tabernacle was fashioned, that in which (are) the lampstand, and the table, and the prothesis of the loaves; which is called, that which is holy.'
9:3 But after the second veil, the tabernacle, that which is called, that which is holy of those which are holy';
9:4 in which there is a golden censer, and the ark of the covenant, covered with gold on every side. In which (are) the golden pot, the manna being in it, and the staff of Aaron which bloomed, and the tables of the covenant;
9:5 but above it cherubims of (the) glory shadowing over the mercy-seat, these which are not at present to be spoken of severally;
9:6 but these being thus set in order. The first tabernacle indeed the priests go into it always, completing the ministries;
9:7 but to the second once a year the high priest alone, not without blood, this which he offereth for himself, and for the ignorances of the people.
9:8 But this the holy spirit is manifesting, that the way of the (places) which are holy was not yet manifested, the first tabernacle still abiding;
9:9 that which is likened to this time which (now) is; that during which are offered gift and sacrifice, it being not possible for them, according to conscience, to complete him who worshippeth,
9:10 (being) only with eatings and drinkings and various bathings, which were ordinances of (the) flesh until (the) time of the institution.
9:11 But Christ having come the high priest of the good things which will be, through the great tabernacle which is complete, not being fashioned with hand, that is to say, that it is not that of this creation,
9:12 nor through (the) blood of goats is it and calves, but through his own blood came into the (places) which are holy once, having found an eternal redemption.
9:13 For if (the) blood of goats and calves and ashes of an heifer sprinkled upon those who are unclean cleanseth unto (the) cleansing of the flesh:
9:14 then how much more [is] (the) blood of Christ, he (lit. this) who through the holy spirit offered himself clean to God, will cleanse our conscience from the dead works to serve the living and true God?
9:15 And therefore (he) is a mediator of a new covenant, that, a death having happened for a redemption of the transgressions which were during the first covenant, [that] they who are called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.
9:16 For where a testament is, it is necessary that there should be (the) death of him who established it.
9:17 For the testament (is) confirmed over dead (men): because it hath not power as long as liveth he who established it.
9:18 Therefore neither the first was cleansed without blood.
9:19 For Moses having spoken to all the people every commandment according to the law, took [a] blood of calves and goats and [a] water and [a] scarlet wool and [a] hyssop, and both the book itself, and all the people he sprinkled, saying:
9:20 This is (the) blood of the covenant which God ordered you.'
9:21 And the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry he sprinkled thus with the blood.
9:22 Nearly all things are cleansed according to the law. with [a] blood, and without shedding blood forgiveness is not.
9:23 It was necessary indeed then that the forms of those which are in the heavens should be cleansed with these, but these themselves the (things) of the heavens with sacrifices better than these.
9:24 For Christ came not into holy (places) fashioned with hand, pattern of the true ones, but into (the) heaven itself, manifesting himself now before God for us:
9:25 not that he may offer himself many times; as the high priest who cometh into the (places) which are holy (once) a year with [a] blood not his own;
9:26 otherwise he ought to have suffered many times from (the) foundation of the world: but now once at (the) completion of the ages he manifested himself, that he might put away (the) sin through his sacrifice.
9:27 And according as it is appointed for the men to die once, but after this a judgement;
9:28 thus also Christ offered himself once, that he might bear up (the) sins of many, but the second time he shall manifest himself without sin for [a] salvation of them who look out forward to him.
10:1 For (the) law having a shadow of the good (things) which come, being not the very image of these things, (going on year) by year in the same sacrifices, these which they offer continually; it is not possible for them ever to complete them who come in (to offer them).
10:2 Otherwise would they not have ceased offering them? Because that they have not any conscience of sins, namely those who worshipped, having been once cleansed.
10:3 But in them they were remembering the sins (year) by year.
10:4 For it is an impossibility for (the) blood of calves and goats to take away sins.
10:5 Therefore, coming into the world he saith: 'A sacrifice and an offering thou wishedst not, but a body thou preparedst for me, not, but a body hast thou prepared me:
10:6 over holocausts and (offerings) because of (the) sin thou wast not well pleased:
10:7 then I said: "Behold I come, in a volume of book it is written concerning me to do, God, thy will."'
10:8 Above he saith: 'Sacrifices, and offerings, and holocausts and (offerings) because of (the) sin thou wishedst not, nor wast well pleased over them,' which are those which are offered according to the law,
10:9 then he said: Behold I come to do thy will.' He doeth away with the first, that he may institute the second,
10:10 this will in which we were sanctified through the offering of (the) body of Jesus Christ once.
10:11 And every priest is standing daily ministering, offering the same sacrifices many times, these for which it is not possible ever to take away sin:
10:12 but he offered himself for our sins, one sacrifice; he sat on the right hand of God for ever;
10:13 henceforth expecting until his enemies are put below his feet.
10:14 For one offering will complete them, who will be sanctified, for ever.
10:15 For the holy spirit witnesseth to us; for after his saying:
10:16 This (is) the covenant which I established with them after those days, said the Lord; I shall put (lit. give) my laws into (lit. down to) their heart, and I shall (lit. will) write them upon their thoughts;
10:17 and I shall not remember any more their sins and their lawlessnesses.'
10:18 For where forgiveness of these (is), then there is not offering any more concerning (the) sin.
10:19 Having then, my brethren, boldness unto (the) way of the (places) which are holy in (the) blood of Jesus;
10:20 that which he made new for us, the new and living way through the veil which is his flesh;
10:21 and a great priest over (the) house of God;
10:22 Let us come in with a true heart and [a] fulness of [a] faith, our hearts being sprinkled from evil conscience: and our bodies washed in [a] pure water,
10:23 let us lay hold on the confession of the hope without wavering, for faithful is he who promised:
10:24 let us observe one another in [a] zeal of [a] love and good works;
10:25 And not forsake our synagogue according as (the) custom of some is, but exhorting so much the more as ye see that the day drew near.
10:26 For if we should sin willingly after we receive (the) knowledge of the truth, there is not sacrifice left any more concerning sins,
10:27 but a looking out for [a] judgement which is fearful, and a jealousy of [a] fire about to consume them who are against him.
10:28 Should any one reject (the) law of Moses, without compassion on (the word of) two or three witnesses he dieth:
10:29 Then of how much worse torment, think ye, that he will be worthy, who will trample upon (the) Son of God; and he esteemed (the) blood of the covenant that it is unclean, that in which he was sanctified, and he insulted the spirit of the grace?
10:30 For we know him who said: '(The) vengeance is mine own, and I (prom) shall (lit. will) recompense.' And again: 'The Lord will judge his people.'
10:31 A more fearful thing it is to fall into (the) hands of the living God.
10:32 Remember your former days; in which ye were receiving (the) light, having endured in a great (amount) of pains;
10:33 partly, in reproaches and tribulations being made a spectacle; partly, in that ye were sharers with them who fare thus.
10:34 For ye both suffered with them who were bound, and ye take joyfully (the) robbing of your possessions. Knowing that ye have [a] better riches and (such as) will stay for ever.
10:35 Your boldness then throw it not away, this which hath a great recompense of reward.
10:36 Ye have need of [a] patience, that, if ye should do (the) wish of God, ye may receive the promise.
10:37 For yet again a very little while, he will come, who cometh, and he will not delay.
10:38 But the righteous one will live from (the) faith. And if he should hide (away) my soul shall not be well pleased with him.
10:39 But we are not they of hiding (away) for a fleeing back unto [a] destruction, but for [a] faith unto [a] lifegiving of the soul.
11:1 But (the) faith is an assurance of (the things) which are hoped for, it is a proof of things which are not seen.
11:2 For in this the elders were witnessed unto.
11:3 In [a] faith we understand that the ages were prepared by (the) word of God, because from those which appear not was made that which is seen.
11:4 In [a] faith Abel offered more (excellent) sacrifice to God than Kain, [this] through which it was witnessed unto him that he was righteous, God witnessing over his gifts: and through it, having died, he still speaketh.
11:5 In [a] faith Enōch was removed, not to see (the) death; and he was not being found, because God removed him: for before the removal, it was witnessed unto him, that he pleased God:
11:6 but without faith it is not possible to please him: for it is right that he who cometh to God should believe that he is, and he will be rewarder of them who seek for him.
11:7 In [a] faith Nōe, having been shown concerning the things which were not yet seen, feared; he fashioned an ark unto a saving of his house, through which (ark) he condemned the world, and he became heir of the righteousness of (the) faith.
11:8 In [a] faith he who was called, namely Abraam, obeyed to come forth to the place which he was to receive as inheritance; and he came forth, not knowing whither he walked.
11:9 In [a] faith he was sojourner in (the) land of the promise, as not his own, having dwelt in tents, with Isaac and Jacob, the fellow heirs of the same promise.
11:10 For they were looking out forward to the city which hath the foundations, whose craftsman and her maker is God.
11:11 In [a] faith Sarra also herself, the barren woman, received [a] power unto (the) sending forth of [a] seed, and it was not (the) time of her age, since he who promised was to her trustworthy.
11:12 Therefore were born from one, and that deadened in body, according as the stars of (the) heaven in their abundance, and as the sand, which is by (the) lips of the sea, which is not numbered.
11:13 According to [a] faith all these died, they received not the promises, but they saw them afar off, and they saluted them, and they confessed that they were strangers and sojourners upon the earth.
11:14 For they who say such things manifest that they seek for a city where they may dwell.
11:15 And if indeed they were remembering that from which they came, then they had time to return to it.
11:16 But now they desire that which is much better, which is that of (the) heaven: therefore God is not ashamed of them to be called God to them, for he prepared for them a city.
11:17 In [a] faith Abraam offered Isaac, being tempted: he offered his only son, even he who received the promises,
11:18 he to whom it was said: In Isaac shall a seed be called for thee':
11:19 and he reasoned that it was possible for God to raise him from them who are dead, therefore he took him (back) in a parable.
11:20 In [a] faith concerning the (things) which will be, Isaac blessed Jacōb and Esau.
11:21 In [a faith Jacōb about to die blessed each of (the) sons of Jōsēph; and he worshipped upon the top of his staff.
11:22 In [a] faith Jōsēph about to die remembered (the) coming forth of (the) sons of Israel, and he ordered concerning his bones.
11:23 In [a] faith, Moses having been born, his parents hid him three months, because they saw the child that he was comely, and they feared not the decree of (the) king.
11:24 In [a] faith Moses, having grown up, refused to be called (the) son of (the) daughter of Pharaō;
11:25 having wished rather to suffer with the people of God, than that he might surfeit in (the) sin for a time;
11:26 having esteemed (the) reproach of Christ, that it was a greater wealth than the treasures of Chēmi: for he was looking out forward to the reward.
11:27 In [a] faith he left Chēmi, he feared not the wrath of (the) king: for he was waiting upon the unseen, as one seeing him.
11:28 In [a] faith he kept the Pascha and the shedding of the blood, that the destroyer should not touch their firstborn.
11:29 In [a] faith they passed through the sea of Shari as (if) by [a] dry land: in which the men of Chēmi having made attempt were submerged.
11:30 In [a] faith the walls of Jerichō fell, having been compassed seven days.
11:31 In [a] faith Raab the harlot perished not with them who were disobedient, having received the spies in [a] peace.
11:32 And what further should I say For the time shall fail me, narrating concerning Gedeōn, Barak, Sampsōm, Jephthaie, David and Samouēl and the prophets also:
11:33 who through [a] faith conquered kingdoms, worked [the] righteousness, obtained [the] promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
11:34 quenched (the) power of [a] fire, fled from the edge of swords. They prevailed in (the) weakness, they became strong in [the] war, they turned back armies of strangers.
11:35 Women received their dead from a resurrection: others were tortured, they accepted not the redemption; that they might obtain the better resurrection:
11:36 but others had trial in mockings and scourgings, but further, also bonds and prisons:
11:37 they were stoned. They were sawn with (the) saw, they were tempted, they died by (the) killing of (the) sword, they walked in sheepskins, in goatskins, being in want, afflicted, suffering:
11:38 these of whom the world was not being worthy, wandering in the deserts, and the mountains, and the caves, and the holes of (the) earth.
11:39 And all these to whom it was witnessed through the faith received not the promise,
11:40 God from (the) first having looked forward to a better thing because of us, that they might not be completed without us.
12:1 Therefore indeed we also having cover us so great a cloud of witnesses, having left all pride and (the) sin which so much besets us, through [a] patience let us run in the race which is set down for us,
12:2 looking at the author of (the) faith and the completer, Jesus, he who in exchange for the joy which was set before him, endured a cross, despised (the) shame, sat (down) at the right hand of the throne of God.
12:3 For reason in yourselves of this endurance of such an one at the hands of the sinners unto a contradiction against themselves, that ye may not be weary, fainting in your souls.
12:4 Ye have not yet stood (up) opposing (the) sin even unto (the) blood:
12:5 and ye forgot the exhortation [this] which spake to you as sons. My son, be not discouraged in the chastening of the Lord, nor faint (when) he is reproving thee.
12:6 For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, but be scourgeth all sons whom he will receive.
12:7 Be patient for chastening: God spake to you as sons; for what son (is it) whom his father chasteneth not?
12:8 If ye are without the chastening in which all shared, then ye are false sons, and ye (are) not sons.
12:9 If indeed our fathers of (the) flesh we were having as chasteners, and we were reverencing them; then (is it) not more (right) that we should be subject to the Father of the spirits and live?
12:10 For those indeed for a few days were chastening us according to their will, but he indeed (according to) that which is the more profitable for us, that we might receive from his holiness.
12:11 But all chastening at the time (lit. hour) indeed thou findest it (lit. them) not as things of [a] joy, but for [a] grief: but at (the) last it giveth a peaceful fruit of [the] righteousness to them who were exercised through it.
12:12 Therefore set up the hands which are let (down), and the legs which are paralysed;
12:13 make straight courses for your feet, that the lameness turn not aside, but rather that it may recover.
12:14 Run after [the] peace with every one, and [the] sanctification, that without which no one will see the Lord.
12:15 Looking earnestly lest by any means there is one falling short of the grace; lest by any means there is a bitter root growing up, giving pain, and through it many be polluted;
12:16 lest by any means there is a fornicator or profane-hearted (one) as Esau, who sold his birthright for one meal (lit. food).
12:17 Ye know that after it, wishing to inherit the blessing, he was cast out; for he found not place of repenting, although he had sought for it in tears.
12:18 For ye came not to a fire of handling and (which) burneth, and (to) a gloom and a darkness (which) repelleth and a whirlwind,
12:19 and (the) blast of a trumpet and (the) voice of words, that which those who heard irttreatecl (him) not to speak to them again:
12:20 for they were not being able to bear that which was being said. Even if a beast should touch the mountain they shall stone it,
12:21 and thus was being terrible that which was manifested. For Moses said: 'I am afraid and I tremble':
12:22 but ye come to the mountain of Siōn, and the city of the living God, Jerusalem of (the) heaven, and myriads of angels keeping festival,
12:23 and a church of firstborn (which) is written in the heavens, and God the judge of all, and the spirit of the righteous ones who are completed,
12:24 and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and a blood of a sprinkling speaking more than that of Abel.
12:25 Take heed, refuse not him who speaketh. For if those could not escape upon the earth, having refused him who speaketh, much more we, namely those who will turn away from him who came out of the heavens:
12:26 whose voice moved the earth then; but now he promised, saying: 'Yet another time I (pron.) shall (lit. will) shake not only (the) earth but also the heaven.'
12:27 But this (lit. the), Yet another time, is showing to us a carrying away of the things which are moved as things made, that the things which are not moved may be permanent.
12:28 Therefore being about to receive a kingdom immovable, let us have grace, this through which we shall (lit. will) minister to God, pleasing him in [a] fear and [a] trembling:
12:29 for also our God is a devouring fire.
13:1 Let [the] brotherly love be permanent.
13:2 Forget not [the] hospitality: for through this, unawares, some received angels.
13:3 Remember those who are bound as being bound with them; those who are pained as being yourselves also in body.
13:4 The marriage (is) honourable in all, the bed pure: for the fornicators and the adulterers God will judge.
13:5 Your manner of life is not for [a] loving of silver. The things which are (to you) shall suffice for you; for he himself said: I shall not forsake thee, nor shall I leave thee.'
13:6 So that being assured we (pron.) say: The Lord is my helper; I shall not fear what it is which man will do to me.'
13:7 Remember your rulers who spake to you the word of God: these (of) whom ye see the outcome of their walk (of life), imitate their faith.
13:8 Jesus Christ yesterday and to-day is the same and for ever.
13:9 Let not various and strange doctrines carry you away: for it is good to establish your heart in [a] grace, not in meats, these in which they who walked in them found not profit.
13:10 We having an altar, this from which they have not authority to eat who minister at the tabernacle.
13:11 For the animals whose blood was brought into the holy (places) for (the) sin through the high priest,--(the) body of these is burnt outside the camp.
13:12 Therefore also Jesus, that he might cleanse the people through his own blood, suffered outside the gate.
13:13 Now then let us go out unto him outside the camp, bearing his reproach.
13:14 For we have not here a permanent city, but that which cometh we seek for.
13:15 Let us then offer through him sacrifices of blessing always to God, that is to say, (the) fruit of our lips, confessing his name.
13:16 But [the] beneficence and the sharing (with others) forget not: for such sacrifices are pleasing to God.
13:17 Be persuaded by your rulers, and obey them: for they (are those) who keep watch for your souls, as about to give account of you, that they may do this in [a] joy, and may not groan: for this is profitable for you.
13:18 Pray for us. But we are persuaded that we have a good conscience in all, wishing to walk well.
13:19 But I pray the more to do this, that I may be restored to you quickly.
13:20 But God of [the] peace--he who brought up from them who are dead the great shepherd of the sheep in (the) blood of the eternal covenant, our Lord Jesus Christ-
13:21 He shall perfect you in every good (thing) unto doing his wish, doing for him-(self) that which pleaseth him in us before him, through Jesus Christ; whose is the glory unto age of the ages. Amēn.
13:22 I beseech you, my brethren, bear with (the) word of the beseeching, for through a few (words) I wrote to you.
13:23 Ye know our brother Timotheos, he whom they released: with him (lit. this with him) should he come quickly I shall see you.
13:24 Salute all your rulers, and all the saints. They of [the] Hytalia salute you.
13:25 (The) grace with you all. Amen.
13:26