1:2 I. Paul, (the) apostle of Jesus Christ according to the commandment of God our saviour, and Jesus Christ our hope;
1:3 to Timotheos, my beloved child in (the) faith. (The) grace, (the) mercy, [the] peace, from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:4 According as I besought thee to abide in Ephesos, being (myself) about to go to (the) Makedonia, that thou mightest order some not to teach another doctrine,
1:5 nor that they should attend to fables and genealogies, having no ends, these which give questionings rather than the dispensation of God which is in (the) faith.
1:6 But (the) end of this order is this: [a] love from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and [a] faith unfeigned.
1:7 These with which some agreed not, they turned aside to words of vanity;
1:8 and wishing to be teacher of the law, they understand not the things which they say, nor concerning the things upon which they establish themselves.
1:9 But we know that the law is good, if one should do to it as law.
1:10 Knowing thou this, that the law was not being for the righteous (man), but it was for the lawless and the unruly and the ungodly and the sinners, and them who are not sanctified, for the profane-hearted, for the father-slayers, for the mother-slayers, for the manslayers,
1:11 for the fornicators, for the sleepers with male, for the deceivers of man, for the sellers of freemen, for the false speakers, for false swearers, and every other thing which is contrary to the sound doctrine;
1:12 according to the Gospel of (the) glory of the blessed God, this with which I (pron.) was entrusted.
1:13 I thank him who encouraged me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he reckoned me faithful, he put me unto a ministry.
1:14 I was being a blasphemer at first, and persecutor and insulter, but I had mercy shown me, because I did it (lit. them) unknowingly in [an] unbelief;
1:15 but the grace of our Lord abounded exceedingly with [a] faith and [a] love which is in Christ Jesus.
1:16 Faithful is (the) word, and it is worthy that we should receive it in all receiving, that Christ Jesus came to the world to save the sinners; among whom I am the first:
1:17 but I had mercy shown me, that in me first Jesus Christ might manifest all his long-suffering, for a pattern to them who believe him unto [an] eternal a life,
1:18 (The) King of the ages, the incorruptible, the invisible only God, the honour is his and the glory unto age of the ages. Amen.
1:19 This order I lodge with thee, my child Timotheos, according to the prophecies which came before upon thee, that thou mightest arm thyself in them for the good soldiership;
1:20 having [a] faith and a good conscience. That which some having left were wrecked in the faith:
1:21 from whom is Hymeneos and Alesandros, these whom I gave to Satan that they might be taught not to blaspheme.
2:1 I beseech then first of all things, to make prayers and supplications, intercessions, thanksgivings for all men,
2:2 for the kings, and for all who are exalted; that they may be in a life tranquil and meek, in all godliness and all gravity.
2:3 This is good, and it is acceptable before God our saviour;
2:4 he who wishoth that all men should be saved, and come unto (the) knowing the truth.
2:5 For God is one, and the mediator of God and the men is one, a man Christ Jesus,
2:6 he who gave himself as redemption for all; the witness in his time;
2:7 this to which I (pron.) was appointed as (ft) proclaimer and apostle. I say (the) truth, I say not falsehood, (the) teacher of Gentiles, in [a] faith and [a] truth.
2:8 I wish then that all men pray in every place, lifting up holy hands, without anger and reasoning.
2:9 Thus also the women, being in [a] placid beauty of heart, and [a] reverence and [a] prudence. Adorning themselves not in plaitings and gold (plur.) and pearls or in a clothing of great price;
2:10 but that which beseemeth the women to practise, professing [a] devoutness from good works.
2:11 Let a woman learn in [a] meekness in all subjection.
2:12 But I command not woman to teach, nor to be head over her husband, but let her be taught in [a] meekness.
2:13 For Adam was formed first, then Eva;
2:14 and Adam was not deceived; but the woman--she having been deceived, became in a transgression:
2:15 but she shall be saved through her child-bearing, if they should stay in [the] faith and [the] love and [the] sanctification in [a] prudence.
3:1 Faithful is (the) word, he who wisheth for a bishopric, (it is) a good work which he desireth.
3:2 It is worthy then that the bishop should be irreproachable, having become husband of one wife, watchful, prudent, orderly, hospitable, a good teacher,
3:3 not a winebibber [is], not a striker, but fair [is], not contentious [is], not a lover of silver [is],
3:4 taking good care of his house, having children who are in [a] subjection with all gravity.
3:5 But if there is one (who) knoweth not (how) to take care of his own house, how will he take care of the church of God?
3:6 Not a novice [is], that he may not be proud, and fall down into [a] judgement of the devil.
3:7 But it is worthy also that there should be good witness to him from those who are outside; that he may not fall into a reproach and a snare of the devil.
3:8 Deacons also thus, being grave, being not double-spoken, and not addicted to much wine, being not greedy, being not lovers of dishonourable gain,
3:9 having the mystery of (the) faith in a pure conscience.
3:10 These also, let them be proved first, then let them minister, being blameless.
3:11 Women also thus, being grave, being not slanderers, watchful, faithful in all things.
3:12 Let deacons be husbands of one wife, taking good care of their children and their house.
3:13 For they who minister well,--a good degree (is) that which they make for themselves, and [a] great boldness in the faith, which is in Christ Jesus.
3:14 These things I write to thee, hoping to come to thee quickly;
3:15 but if I should delay, that thou mayest know how it is worthy to live in (the) house of God, which is the church of the living God, which (is) a pillar and a firmness of (the) truth.
3:16 And confessedly, great is the mystery of the godliness, that which was manifested in (the) flesh, was justified in the spirit, was manifested unto the angels, was proclaimed among the nations, was believed in the world, was taken up away in [a] glory.
4:1 But the spirit is speaking plainly, that in the last days some shall depart from (the) faith, attending to seducing spirits, and demon words
4:2 of false-speaking hypocrites, their conscience being burnt in them;
4:3 forbidding the marriage, and (commanding) to abstain from [the] meats, these which God created for the faithful, to take of them in [a] thanksgiving, and (for) them who knew the truth.
4:4 Because every creature of God is good, and there is not anything which is rejected, being taken in [a] thanksgiving:
4:5 for it is sanctified through [a] word of God and [an] intercession.
4:6 Laying these things before the brethren, thou shalt be a good minister of Christ, nourished in the words of (the) faith and the good teaching after which thou walkedst:
4:7 but depart from profane stories and old woman fables: exercise them in [the] godliness;
4:8 for the exercise of the body is profitable for [a] little, but [the] godliness is profitable in all things, having a promise of (the) present life, and (of) that which cometh.
4:9 Faithful is (the) word, and it is worthy that we should receive it in all receiving
4:10 for therefore we toil and we are reproached, because we hoped in the living God, who is (the) saviour of all men, chiefly the faithful.
4:11 Order these things and teach.
4:12 Let not any despise thy youth, but be a pattern to the faithful in (the) word, in the walk, in [the] love, in [the] faith, in [the] purity.
4:13 Till I come, attend to [the] reading, [the] prayer, [the] instruction.
4:14 Neglect not the grace which is in thee, this which was given to thee through a prophecy, with the laying on hand of the presbytery.
4:15 These be diligent in; be in these; that thy coming forward may be manifest to all.
4:16 Take heed to thyself, and the instruction. Be continuing in them; for doing this thou shalt save thyself, and them who hear thee.
5:1 Strike not an old man, but exhort him as a father, the youths as brethren,
5:2 the old women as mothers, but the young women as sisters, in all purity.
5:3 Honour the widows who are really widows.
5:4 But if there is a widow who hath children or children of children, let them learn first [a] piety in their own house, and that they should honour their forefathers: for this is good and acceptable before God.
5:5 She who is really a widow, being left alone hoped in God, continuing in the supplications and the prayers by night and day;
5:6 but she who is luxurious died (though) alive.
5:7 Order these others that they be irreproachable.
5:8 But if there is one who taketh not care chiefly for them of his own house, he denied (the) faith, and he is worse than an unbeliever.
5:9 Let a widow be enrolled (lit. called) not below sixty years, having been wife of one husband,
5:10 witnessed to in good works; namely whether she nourished children, or she received strangers, or she washed the feet of the saints, or she relieved the afflicted, or whether she walked after all good works.
5:11 But the young widows refuse: for when they should be wanton against Christ, they wish to marry;
5:12 having a judgement, because they denied the faith of (the) first (state).
5:13 But withal they learn also to be idle, going about from house to house; [but] not only idle, but also tattlers and busybodies, speaking the things which are not worthy.
5:14 I wish then that the young women marry, and bear children, and be mistress of their house, not to give any pretext for the adversary concerning a calumny.
5:15 For already some turned aside after Satan.
5:16 If there is a believing woman who hath widows, let her care for them, and let them not add burden to the church, that it may be sufficient for those who are really widows.
5:17 The presbyters who preside well, let them be worthy of a double honour, chiefly those who toil in (the) word and the teaching.
5:18 For the Scripture saith: Thou shalt not muzzle ox threshing. And the labourer is worthy of his hire.'
5:19 Thou shalt not receive an accusation, against a presbyter except with two or three witnesses.
5:20 Them who sin reprove before all, that to (the) rest also there may be fear.
5:21 I witness before God and Christ Jesus and his chosen angels, that thou keep these things, without justifying any one previous to (the) judgement, not doing anything according to partiality.
5:22 Lay not hand upon any quickly, nor be sharer in sins of another: keep thyself pure.
5:23 And drink not water any longer; but drink a little wine for thee, because of thy stomach, and thy many weaknesses.
5:24 There are men whose sins are manifest, about to draw before them unto the judgement; but there are others also whose (sins) will walk after them.
5:25 Thus also the good works are manifest; and the others who are of another kind will not be able to be hid.
6:1 The servants who are under (the) yoke, let them esteem their masters in all honour, that (the) name of God and the teaching may not be blasphemed.
6:2 But they who have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren; but rather let them serve, because they are believers and beloved, They who keep on in benevolence. With these things teach and exhort.
6:3 But he who giveth other teaching, and who cometh not to sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the teaching of [the] godliness,
6:4 was proud, knowing not anything, but was diseased about questions and words of dispute, from which arise envyings and contentions and blasphemies and evil thoughts
6:5 and wranglings. Men having their heart corrupt, and bereft of (the) truth, thinking of [the] godliness that it is a producer of gain.
6:6 But [the] godliness in [a] sufficiency is a great producer of gain.
6:7 For we brought not anything into the world, and it is not possible for us to bring anything out
6:8 but having [a] food and [a] raiment, let these suffice us.
6:9 But they who wish to be rich fall into a temptation and a snare and many lusts of foolishness, (which) profit not, those which plunge the man into (the) destructions and [the] perdition.
6:10 For (the) root of all evil is the love of silver, which some loved; they went astray from (the) faith, and they drew to themselves many griefs.
6:11 But thou, O (the) man of God, flee from these things, but run after [the] righteousness, [the] godliness, [the] faith, [the] love, [the] patience, [the] suffering in [a] meekness.
6:12 Strive the good strife of (the) faith, lay hold on the eternal life, to which thou wast called, and thou confessedst the good confession before many witnesses.
6:13 I order thee before God, he who giveth life to all things, and Christ Jesus, he who witnessed before Pontios Pilatos the good confession,
6:14 to keep this commandment, being thyself spotless, being blameless until (the) manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
6:15 He whom will manifest in his times the blessed one, who is omnipotent, (the) King of the kings, and (the) Lord of the lords,
6:16 the one alone, who hath [the] immortality, and who dwelleth in the light unapproachable; whom no man saw, nor is it possible that they should see him; he whose is the honour and the strength for ever. Amēn.
6:17 The rich ones of this present age--order them not to be proud, nor to hope in this richness which is not permanent, but to hope in God, he who giveth all things to us in [a] richness that we may enjoy;
6:18 to do good work, to be rich in good works, to be ready to give, as sharers;
6:19 laying (lit. throwing into) for themselves a good foundation unto that which cometh, that they may lay hold on the true life.
6:20 O Timotheos, keep the deposit, turning aside from profane and empty stories and that which opposeth us of the knowledge of the false name:
6:21 this which some having promised agreed not with (the) faith. (The) grace with you.
6:22