1:2 I. Paul and Silouanos and Timotheos to the church of Thessalonike in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: (the) grace to you and (the) peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:3 We give thanks to God always for you all, remembering you in our prayers unfailingly,
1:4 remembering (the) work of your faith and (the) toil of the love and the patience and the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ before God and our Father;
1:5 knowing, our brethren whom God loved, your election,
1:6 because our Gospel came not to you in (the) word only, but in [a] power and [a] holy spirit and much comfort. According as ye know the manner (in) which we became to you because of you.
1:7 And ye also became like to us and the Lord, having received the word in a great tribulation and a joy of the holy spirit;
1:8 so that ye became (an) example to all who believe in (the) Makedonia and [the] Achaia.
1:9 For (the) word of the Lord spread abroad from you not only in (the) Makedonia and [the] Achaia, but in every place your faith, which is toward God, was spread abroad; so that we (pron.) have not need of speaking concerning anything.
1:10 For they (are they) who speak concerning us, concerning (the) manner of the entering which we had (chi to you; and the manner (in which) ye turned to God from the idols, to be servant of God, the living (and) true;
1:11 and to look out forward to his Son from the heavens, he whom he raised from them who are dead, Jesus, who will save us from (the) wrath which cometh.
2:1 For ye (pron.) know, our brethren, our entering which we had (t.uni) to you, that it was not empty:
2:2 but we suffered before and we were insulted, according as ye know, namely in Philippois: we were emboldened in our God to speak to you the Gospel of God in a great conflict.
2:3 For our exhortation was not from [an] error, nor from [an] uncleanness, nor from [a] subtlety:
2:4 but according as we were approved by God to be entrusted with the Gospel, thus we speak.Not as some, pleasing [the] men, but God who approveth our hearts.
2:5 For neither were we ever found in [a] word of flattery, according as ye know, nor in an excuse for a wrongdoing, God witnesseth;
2:6 nor were we seeking for glory from [the] men, nor of you, nor of others,
2:7 it being possible for us to be for a burden as apostles of Christ. But we became little children in your midst, as a nurse cherishing her children:
2:8 thus being greatly in love of you, we were well pleased to give to you not only the Gospel of God, but also our souls, because that ye were to us beloved.
2:9 For remember, our brethren, our toil and our pain: working by night and day, that we might not add burden upon one of you, we proclaimed among you the Gospel of God.
2:10 Ye (are they) who witness, and God, that holily and righteously and unblameably we were to you, namely those who believe.
2:11 According as ye know that as a father beseecheth his children,
2:12 thus we are beseeching each one of you and exhorting you and witnessing, that ye walk worthy of God, he who called you into his kingdom and his glory.
2:13 And therefore we also give thanks to God unceasingly, that, having received the word of (the) hearing of God through us, ye received it not as a word of man, but as truly being a word of God, which is that which worketh in you, namely those who believe.
2:14 For ye, our brethren, became like to the churches of God which are in [the] Joudēa in Christ Jesus: because ye also received the same pains by your fellow tribesmen, according as we also suffered from the Jews;
2:15 who killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and us also persecuted; and they please not God, being opposers of all men;
2:16 preventing us from speaking to the Gentiles that they may be saved; unto (the) completing their sins always: but the anger came upon them unto the end
2:17 But we, our brethren, were bereaved of you for the space (lit. a time) of an hour, in presence, and not in (the) heart; we hastened exceedingly to see your face in a great desire:
2:18 because we wished to come to you, I indeed, Paul, once and twice (lit. two); and Satan prevented. me.
2:19 For what is our hope or our joy or (the) crown of our boast? Are not ye before our Lord Jesus in his coming?
2:20 For ye are our glory and our joy.
3:1 Therefore not being able to stay, we were well pleased to be left alone in Athēnnas;
3:2 and we sent our brother Timotheos to you, and minister of God in the Gospel of Christ, to confirm you and pray for your faith;
3:3 that no one might be moved in these tribulations. For ye (pron.) know that we were set for this thing:
3:4 for even when we were with you, we were beforehand in saying to you that we shall (lit. will) be oppressed; according as it came to pass and ye know.
3:5 Therefore I also am unable to be long-suffering, I sent to know your faith, lest by any means he who tempteth tempted you, and your toil became empty.
3:6 But now Timotheos having come to me from with you, and having said to us (the) good tidings of your faith and your love, and that our good remembrance (is) in you, loving to see us, according as is with us also unto you;
3:7 therefore we were consoled about you, our brethren, for all your necessity and all your tribulation through your faith:
3:8 because now we live, should ye stand in the Lord.
3:9 For what thanksgiving is it possible for us to give in return to the Lord for all the joy with which we rejoice for you before our God;
3:10 in the day and the night praying more (and) more unto the seeing your face, and unto perfecting the deficiencies of your faith?
3:11 But God himself, our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ shall dispose our way to you:
3:12 but you the Lord shall make to multiply and abound in the love to one another and all men, according as it is with us also unto you;
3:13 unto (the) confirming your hearts in [a] blamelessness, in [a] holiness before God and our Father, in (the) coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all the saints of his. Amēn.
4:1 Finally, our brethren, we beseech you and we pray you in the Lord Jesus, that according as ye received of us (how) to walk, according as is worthy and is pleasing to God, according as also ye (do) walk, [that] ye should abound more.
4:2 For ye know the orders which we delivered to you through our Lord Jesus.
4:3 For this is (the) wish of God, your sanctification, to keep yourselves from [the] fornication;
4:4 each one of you to know his vessel to possess it for himself in [a] sanctification and [an] honour,
4:5 not in [a] passion of [a] lust, according as the Gentiles also who know not God.
4:6 Not to go beyond, not to do his brother wrong in (the) deed; because that the Lord is an avenger of all these, according as we said to you before, and we witnessed.
4:7 For God called us not unto [an] uncleanness, but in [a] sanctification.
4:8 Therefore he who is disobedient, was not being (so) toward man, but God who gave his holy spirit unto you.
4:9 But concerning [the] brotherly love ye have not need (for me) to write to you: for ye are men taught through God to love one another;
4:10 for even ye do it with all the brethren who are in all (the) Makedonia. But we beseech you, our brethren, to abound more,
4:11 to study to be meek, and to work your own things, and to work with your hands according as we ordered you;
4:12 that ye may walk seemly before them who are without, and have not need of anything.
4:13 But we wish you not to be (lit. being) ignorant, our brethren, concerning them who sleep; that ye may not grieve as (the) rest also who have not hope.
4:14 For if we believe that Jesus died and he rose, thus they who slept through Jesus, God will bring them with him.
4:15 For this we said to you in (the) word of the Lord, that we, namely they who are alive. who will be left unto (the) coming of the Lord shall not precede them who slept.
4:16 Because the Lord himself with command, with a voice of archangel and a trumpet of God, shall come down from (the) heaven, and the dead who are in Christ shall rise first:
4:17 afterwards we, namely they who are alive, who will be left, shall be caught up with them together in clouds, that we may meet the Lord in the air. And thus we shall be with the Lord always.
4:18 Wherefore comfort one another in these words.
5:1 But concerning the times and the seasons, [the] brethren, ye have not need (for me) to write to you.
5:2 For ye (pron.) know perfectly that (the) day of the Lord, as a thief in the night thus it cometh.
5:3 If they should say: '(The) peace and (the) certainty,' then suddenly shall come upon them [a] destruction, as the pang which cometh unto her who is with child, and they shall not be able to flee.
5:4 But ye, our brethren, were not being in (the) darkness, that the day may overtake you as thieves:
5:5 for ye all are sons of (the) light, and sons of the day: but we (are) not those of the night, nor (are) we those of (the) darkness;
5:6 so then let us not sleep as (the) rest also, but let us watch and be sober.
5:7 For they who sleep slept in the night; and they who are drunken were drunken in the night.
5:8 But we are those of the day: let us be sober, and clothe ourselves with the breastplate of [the] faith and [the] love and the helmet of [the] hope of [the] salvation.
5:9 Because God appointed us not unto [an] anger, but unto a saving of our life through our Lord Jesus Christ,
5:10 he who died for us, that whether watching or sleeping we shall live with him together.
5:11 Therefore comfort one another, and let each one of you edify his neighbour, according as also ye do.
5:12 But we beseech you, our brethren, to know them who toil among you, and those who are before you in the Lord, and those who instruct you;
5:13 and esteem them the more in [a] love because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves.
5:14 We beseech you, our brethren, instruct the unruly, comfort the faint hearted, support them who are weak, be longsuffering to all.
5:15 Take heed, let not one do (lit. give an) evil to another (lit. one) in return for an evil, but always run after the good with one another and with all.
5:16 Rejoice always;
5:17 pray unfailingly;.
5:18 give thanks in everything: for this is (the) wish of God in Christ Jesus in you.
5:19 Quench not the spirit;
5:20 despise not the prophecies;
5:21 prove all things; lay hold on the good;
5:22 avoid all things evil.
5:23 But God himself of the peace shall sanctify you together being complete; and he shall keep your spirit sound and the soul and the body unblameably in (the) coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
5:24 Faithful is he who calleth you, and he will also do (it).
5:25 Our brethren, pray for us.
5:26 Salute one another in an holy kiss.
5:27 I adjure you by the Lord to read this epistle to all the holy brethren.
5:28 (The) grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with you all. Amen.
5:29