1:2 Peter, (the) apostle of Jesus Christ, to the elect who are in (the) foreign (land) among the dispersion of Pontos, (the) Galatia, (the) Kappodokia, [the] Asia and [the] Bēthania,
1:3 according to a foreknowledge of God the Father, in the sanctification of the spirit, unto a redemption and a sprinkling of (the) blood of Jesus Christ our Lord: (The) grace and the peace shall be multiplied to you.
1:4 Blessed is God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to (the) abundance of his mercy begat us into a hope of life through (the) rising of Jesus Christ from them who are dead,
1:5 into an inheritance incorruptible and unpolluted and unfading: Kept for you in the heavens,
1:6 namely they who are watched over in [a] power of God through (the) faith unto a salvation prepared, about to be revealed in the last times;
1:7 that in which ye will be glad for a little (while) now: If it is right that ye should be grieved in temptations of many kinds;
1:8 that (the) choiceness of your faith may be more precious than the gold which will perish, but being proved through [a] fire; that ye may be found in [a] praise and [a] glory and [an] honour in the revelation of Jesus Christ.
1:9 Him whom ye know not, ye love; him now ye see not, but ye believe him. Be glad in an unspeakable joy which was glorified:
1:10 receiving (the) end of your faith, (the) salvation of your souls.
1:11 For concerning this salvation the prophets sought; and they searched, they who prophesied of the grace which was in you;
1:12 searching after the time which the spirit of Christ spake in them, (they) having witnessed before of the pains of Christ, and the glories which come after these (things):
1:13 they to whom it was revealed, that they were doing it not for themselves, but they were ministering them to you, these things which were now shown to you through them who preached good tidings to you in a holy spirit sent from (the) heaven; the things which there are angels desiring to see.
1:14 Therefore, girding yourselves upon the loins of your heart, watching perfectly, hope for the grace which will be brought to you in the revelation of Jesus Christ;
1:15 as children of (the) obedience. Not conforming yourselves to (lit. in) the former lusts which ye were doing in an ignorance:
1:16 but as he who called you is holy, be ye also holy in all (your) walk (of life);
1:17 (16) for it is written: 'Be ye holy; because I also am holy.'
1:18 And if him, who will judge without respect of persons each one according to his works, ye are to call Our Father,' walk in the time of your sojourn in [a] fear
1:19 Knowing that ye were not redeemed in [a] gold and [a] silver, which will corrupt, from your vain walk, which your fathers delivered to you;
1:20 but ye were redeemed through a precious blood, as (of) a lamb without spot and without stain, Christ,
1:21 foreknown indeed from (the) foundation of the world, but manifested unto (the) last of the times because of you,
1:22 who believe God through him who raised him from them who are dead, and he glorified him, so that your faith and your hope may be in God.
1:23 Having purified your soul in (the) obedience of the truth into an unfeigned love of brethren in a pure heart, love one another perseveringly;
1:24 having been born not of a sowing, which will corrupt, but in an incorruption through the word of God, who liveth and who abideth.
1:25 Because all flesh was (plur.) as [a] grass, and all its glory was as a flower of [a] grass. The grass dried, and its flower fell away;
1:26 but the word of the Lord abideth for ever. But this is the word which was proclaimed among you.
2:1 Having laid down all malice, and all subtlety, and all hypocrisy, and all envy, and malice all slander,
2:2 as young children lately born, yearn after the milk reasonable and without subtlety, that ye may grow in it into [the] salvation.
2:3 If ye tasted that the Lord is kind:
2:4 to whom ye come, the living stone, rejected indeed by [the] men, but he is chosen with God, and he is precious:
2:5 and ye also are as living stones, building yourselves a spiritual house, for a holy priesthood, for (the) offering spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
2:6 Because it is written in the Scripture: Lo, I shall (lit. will) lay in Sian a chosen stone, as head of corner: and he who believeth him shall not be ashamed.'
2:7 The preciousness then was to you, namely they who believe. But (to) the unbelievers indeed (pron.) the stone which they who build rejected, this became a head of corner,
2:8 and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence-- they who will stumble at the word, not consenting to that in which they were also placed.
2:9 But ye are a chosen race, a kingdom, a priesthood, a holy nation, a people justified, that ye might manifest the virtues of him who called you from (the) darkness into his light, which is wonderful:
2:10 who were not a people once, but now ye become a people of God; they who were not to have mercy shown to them, but now mercy was shown to you.
2:11 My beloved, I pray you as sojourners and strangers, avoid the fleshly lusts which are armed against the soul.
2:12 Let your walk (of life) be serviceable among the Gentiles, that if they spoke against you as evil doers, judging (lit. seeing) from your good works they may glorify God in (the) day of [the] visitation.
2:13 Be subject to every creation of human origin because of the Lord:
2:14 whether (the) king as exalted, or the governors as sent through him, for a taking vengeance on the evil doers, but for a praise of good doers.
2:15 Because this is (the) wish of God: to do the good; that ye may shut out (e2pett) (the) ignorance of the senseless men:
2:16 as free; and having the freedom, Not as a covering of [the] malice, but as servants of God.
2:17 Honour all. Love the love of brethren. Fear God. Honour (the) king.
2:18 [The] servants being subject to your masters in all fear; not only the good (and) equitable, but also the others who are perverse.
2:19 For this is acceptable, [but] if because of [a] conscience of God there is one (who) will undergo griefs, wrong being done to him.
2:20 For what is the praise, if ye commit sin, and being buffeted, ye are longsuffering? But (if) doing the good and suffering ye endure, [for] this is acceptable with God;
2:21 for ye were called to this. Because Christ also suffered for us, he left to us an example, that we might walk after his footsteps:
2:22 he who committed not sin, nor was subtlety found in his mouth:
2:23 being reviled, he was not reviling; suffering, he was not being angry; but he was giving himself to the judgement of the true judge:
2:24 he who bare up our sins upon the tree through his body, that we, having died from [the] sins, might live to [the] righteousness. He through whose wound ye were healed.
2:25 For ye were being as sheep going astray, but ye return now to your shepherd and (the) bishop of your souls.
3:1 Thus also [it is] the women being subject to their husbands; if there are some who consent not to the word, through the walk (of life) of the women that they may be gained without word;
3:2 seeing your walk (of life) chaste in [a] fear.
3:3 Among these let not the ornament be (that) which is outward, of the broideries of plaiting of the hair (plur.), and the broideries of gold, or in a wearing of adorned raiment;
3:4 but the man which is hidden in the heart, in the incorruptibility of the spirit which is tranquil and meek, that which is before God of many kinds.
3:5 For thus it was once with the holy women, they were hoping in God, they were adorning themselves, being subject to their husbands:
3:6 [for] as Sarra, obeying Abraam, calling him my lord,' she whose daughters ye were, doing the good, and not fearing any fear.
3:7 Thus also [the] husbands, dwelling with them, knowing that the women are a weak vessel, honouring them, as being fellow-heirs with you of the grace of (the) life of many kinds, that ye be not hindered in your prayers.
3:8 But finally, being all of one thought, being fellow-sufferers, being of brotherly love, tenderhearted, being humble:
3:9 and not giving an evil for an evil, nor a reviling for a reviling, but that which is contrary, blessing; because ye were called unto this thing, that ye might inherit the blessing.
3:10 For he who wisheth to love [a] life, and to see good days, let him refrain his tongue from the evil, and his lips, not to speak [a] subtlety.
3:11 Let him turn aside from the evil: let him do the good; let him seek for [a] peace, and pursue it.
3:12 Because (the) eyes of the Lord look upon the righteous, and his ears incline to their prayer; but (the) face of the Lord (is) against them who do the evil.
3:13 And who will be able to give pain to you, if ye should be zealous of the good?
3:14 But if ye even suffer for [the] righteousness, blessed are ye. But their fear, fear it not, nor be troubled.
3:15 But the Lord Christ sanctify him in your hearts. Being prepared always for [a] defence to all who will ask you a word concerning the hope which is in you,
3:16 but in [a] meekness and [a] fear: having a good conscience; that they may be ashamed who speak against you as evil doers, and who calumniate your good walk in Christ.
3:17 For it is good that ye should do the good, If the will of God wisheth, and ye should suffer, than doing the evil,
3:18 Because Christ also died once because of (the) sin for us, [but] the righteous for the wicked, that he might bring us in to God. Having died indeed in (the) flesh, but he liveth in the spirit;
3:19 in this he went, he preached good tidings to the spirits also who were in the prison;
3:20 they who were disobedient once, when, the longsuffering of God was indulgent in the days of Nōe, who made an ark, through which (a) few were saved from the water, that is to say, eight souls.
3:21 Thus ye also now, he will save you in a soulstype of a baptism, not a laying down of a filthiness of (the) flesh, but in a good. conscience for (the) praying to God, through (the) resurrection of Jesus Christ;
3:22 who is on the right hand of God, having gone to (the) heaven: angels and authorities and powers were subjected to him.
4:1 Christ then having suffered in (the) flesh for us, [and] ye also arm yourselves in this form; because he who suffered in (the) flesh recovered himself from (the) sin;
4:2 so as not to remain any more in lusts of man, but to spend (the) rest of his life in (the) flesh in (the) wish of God.
4:3 For the time which was passed was sufficient for you doing (the) wish of the Gentiles, walking in pollutions and lusts, and drunkennesses of many kinds, and revellings and defilements and many profane idolatries:
4:4 that is to say, they who think it strange that ye run not with them into the same effusion of [the] dissoluteness, blaspheming:
4:5 they who will give account to him who is prepared to judge them who are alive and them who are dead.
4:6 For therefore were good tidings preached also to the dead, that they indeed might be judged according to [the] men in (the) flesh, but might live according to God in the spirit.
4:7 But (the) end of all things drew near: be understanding then, and watch in the prayers:
4:8 but first of all things let [the] love be continuous in you one to another, because [the] love covereth over many sins.
4:9 Be hospitable one towards another, without murmuring:
4:10 each one (of you) according to the grace which he received, ministering in it among yourselves, as good stewards of the grace of God of many kinds.
4:11 He who will speak, as words of God: he who will minister, as from a power which God will prepare: that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, whose is the glory unto age of all the ages. Amēn.
4:12 my beloved, think it not strange in the burning which will happen among you for a trial to you, as a strange thing which befell you.
4:13 But as being fellow-sufferers of Christ rejoice, that in the revelation also of his glory ye may rejoice in [a] gladness.
4:14 But if ye are reproached in (the) name of the Lord, blessed are ye, because (the spirit ) of the glory and the power and the spirit of God rested itself upon you.
4:15 But let not one of you suffer either as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a looker after that which is not his:
4:16 but if as Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God in this name.
4:17 Because it is (the) time for the judgement to begin from (the) house of God: if it was to begin from us first, then what is (the) end of them who are disobedient to the Gospel of God?
4:18 If the righteous scarcely will be saved, then where appeared the sinner and godless?
4:19 Wherefore let them who suffer according to the wish of God commit their souls unto God the faithful creator in (the) doing the good.
5:1 The presbyters who are among you, I beseech you, I your fellow presbyter, and witness of the sufferings of Christ, and sharer of the glory which will be revealed.
5:2 Tend the flock which is among you of God, taking their visitation not in [a] violence, but in a wish of heart according to God, nor in [a] greediness, but in [a] readiness of heart;
5:3 nor that ye are being lords over the heritages, but be examples to the flock.
5:4 And if the chief shepherd should appear ye will receive the unfading crown of (the) glory.
5:5 Thus, [the] young men, be subject to the old men. But all of you clothe yourselves with humility of heart towards one another: because God opposeth the proud; he giveth [a] grace to the humble.
5:6 Humiliate yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in (the) time of the visitation.
5:7 Cast all your care on him; because he careth for you.
5:8 Be watchful and be sober; because your enemy the devil walketh as a lion, roaring, seeking to swallow up (some) one.
5:9 That one ye shall resist, being firm in the faith, knowing these very troubles: the completion of these (is) for your brethren who are in the world.
5:10 But God of all grace, who called you into his eternal glory in Christ Jesus, having suffered a little, he (pron.) shall perfect you, and he shall establish you, he shall encourage you, he shall lay foundation for you.
5:11 His is the strength and the glory forever. Amēn.
5:12 I wrote to you through Silouanos, our faithful brother, as I think in few (words) encouraging, witnessing that this is the grace of God in [a] truth, this in which ye stand.
5:13 Saluteth you the fellow-chosen (fem.) who is in Babylōn, and Markos my son.
5:14 Salute one another in a kiss of [the] love. (The) peace to you all who are in Christ.
5:15 