1:2 Paul (the) apostle, who is called, of Jesus Christ through (the) wish of God, and Sōsthenēs the brother,
1:3 to the church of God which is in Korinthos, they who were sanctified in Christ Jesus, they who are called, who are holy, with all who call on (the) name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, theirs and ours:
1:4 (the) grace to you and (the) peace from God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:5 I give thanks to my God always for you, and for the grace of God which was given to you in Christ Jesus;
1:6 that in everything ye were enriched in him, in all word and all knowledge;
1:7 according as the witness of Christ was confirmed in you:
1:8 so that ye become not lacking in any grace. Looking out for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ;
1:9 he (lit. this) who shall confirm you unto the end, blameless in (the) day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:10 God is faithful, he who called you into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
1:11 I beseech you, then, my brethren, through (the) name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all (may) be saying the same thing, and that divisions may not be among you; but that ye may be made perfect in one heart and one opinion.
1:12 For it was shown to me concerning you, my brethren, by them of Chloēs, that there are strifes among you.
1:13 But this I say, that each one of you saith: 'I indeed am of Paul, but I of Apollō, but I am of Kēpha, but I am of Christ.'
1:14 Christ was divided. Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptised unto (the) name of Paul?
1:15 I give thanks, that I baptised not any of you except Krispos and Gaios;
1:16 that one should not say, that ye were baptised unto my name.
1:17 But I baptised (the) house also of Stephana: further, I know not whether I baptised another.
1:18 For Christ sent me not to baptise, but to preach good tidings, not in a wisdom of word, that the cross of Christ should not become vain.
1:19 For the word of the cross to them indeed who will perish is a foolishness, but to us (pronoun) namely those who will be saved it is [a] power of God.
1:20 For it is written: I shall (lit. will) destroy (the) wisdom of the wise, and (the) knowledge of the understanding ones I shall (lit. will) reject.'
1:21 Where was a wise man? Where was a scribe? Where was a searcher of this age? Did not God make (the) wisdom of the world foolish?
1:22 For since from the wisdom of God the world knew not God through the wisdom, God was well pleased through the foolishness of the proclaiming to save them who believe.
1:23 Since the Jews ask signs, and the Greeks seek for the wisdom:
1:24 but we (pron.) proclaim Christ crucified: the Jews indeed it is a scandal to them, but (to) the Gentiles it is a foolishness;
1:25 but to us (pron.), namely those who will be saved, the Jews and the Greeks, Christ is a power of God and a wisdom of God.
1:26 Because the foolishness of God is wiser than [the] men, and the weakness of God is stronger than [the] men.
1:27 For see your calling, my brethren, that not many wise according to flesh, not many strong, not many noble:
1:28 but the fools of the world God chose, that he might put to shame the wise; and God chose the weaknesses of the world, that he might put to shame the strong;
1:29 and the ignobilities of the world, and them who are despised, God chose, and them who are not, that he might do away with them who are:
1:30 that no flesh should boast themselves before God.
1:31 From him (are) ye also in Christ Jesus, who became to us [a] wisdom from God, [a] righteousness and [a] sanctification and [a] redemption;
1:32 that according as it is written: He who boasteth himself, let him boast himself in the Lord.'
2:1 And I also having come to you, my brethren, came not according to an exaltation of [a] word, or [a] wisdom; I showed to you the mystery of God.
2:2 For I decided not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ, and (that) be (lit. this) was crucified.
2:3 I also in [a] weakness and [a] fear and a great trembling came to you.
2:4 And my word and my proclaiming was being not in persuasions of words of wisdom of man, but n manifestation of a spirit and a power,
2:5 that your faith might not be in a wisdom of man, but in a power of God.
2:6 But we speak a wisdom among them who are complete: but a wisdom not of this age, nor of the rulers of this age, they (lit. these) who will be done away with:
2:7 but (it is) a wisdom of God which we speak in a mystery which is hidden, which God foreordained before the ages for a glory to us:
2:8 which none of the rulers of this age knew: for if they had known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of (the) glory.
2:9 But according as it is written: The things which eye saw not, nor ear heard [them], and they went not upon (the) heart of man,--the things which God prepared for them who will love him.'
2:10 But to us (pron.) God revealed them through the spirit: for the spirit searcheth everything, and the things which are deep of God.
2:11 For who among [the] men (is it) who knoweth the things of the man except the spirit of the man which is in him? thus also the things of God no one knoweth except the spirit of God.
2:12 But we (pron.) received not the spirit of this world, but the spirit which is (lit. the) from God; that we may know the things which God granted to us.
2:13 Which are these which we speak, not in teachings of [the] men, of words of wisdom, but in teachings of the spirit; explaining spiritual things to the spiritual (persons).
2:14 But the psychic man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God; for it is [a] foolishness to him, and it is not possible for him to know, because it was searched spiritually.
2:15 But the spiritual (pron.) searcheth everything: but no one searcheth him.
2:16 For who knew (the) heart of the Lord? Nay, who will be able to teach him? But we have the heart of Christ.
3:1 But I also, my brethren, could not speak to you as spiritual, but as carnal, as little children in Christ.
3:2 I gave you milk to drink, not meat, for ye were not yet able: but not even now are ye yet able; for yet (are) ye carnal.
3:3 For as there is [a] jealousy and [a] strife among you, (are) ye not carnal, and ye walked according to man?
3:4 For if one saith: I indeed am of Paulos'; but another: 'I (am) of Apollō'; are ye not men?
3:5 What, then, is Apollō? But what (is) Paulos? They are ministers through whom ye believed; each one according as God gave to him.
3:6 I (pron.) planted, Apollo watered; but God caused them to grow.
3:7 Wherefore neither he who planteth, nor he who watereth is anything; but God causeth them to grow.
3:8 But he who planteth and he who watereth are one: but each one will receive his reward according to his own toil.
3:9 For we (are) fellow-workers of God; an a husbandry of God ye (are) a building of God.
3:10 According to the grace of God which is given to me, as a wise master-builder, I laid a foundation; another goes on to build. But let each one see carefully in what manner he built.
3:11 For another foundation it is not possible that another should lay than (lit. outside of) that which is set; which is Jesus Christ.
3:12 If there is he who buildeth upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stone, firewood, hay, straw;
3:13 (the) work of each one shall be manifested: for the day will manifest it, because it will be revealed in [a] fire; and (the) work of each one the fire will prove of what sort it is.
3:14 He whose work will stand which he built, will receive his reward.
3:15 He whose work will be burnt, will suffer loss: but he himself will be saved, but thus as through [a] fire.
3:16 Ye know not that ye (are) a temple of God, and the spirit of God dwelt in you.
3:17 He, then, who will defile the temple of God, this (one) will God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which ye are.
3:18 Let not any one deceive himself. He who thinketh among you that he is wise in this age, let him become foolish, that he may become wise.
3:19 For (the) wisdom of this world is a foolishness with God. For it is written: 'He who overpowereth the wise in their craftiness';
3:20 and again: 'The Lord knoweth the reasonings of wise (men) that they are vain.'
3:21 Wherefore let not any one boast himself in [the] men. For all things are yours;
3:22 whether Paulos, or Apollō, or Kēpha, or the world, or (the) life, or (the) death, or the things which are, or the things which will be; all are yours;
3:23 but ye are of Christ, but Christ is of God.
4:1 Thus also let [the] men think of us as officers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.
4:2 Further, they seek here in the stewards that one should be found faithful.
4:3 To me (pron.) it is a littleness that I should be judged by, you, or by a day of human (judgement): but I (pron.) judge not even myself.
4:4 For neither know I (pron.) anything in myself; but not even in this am I [not] justified: but he who will judge me is the Lord.
4:5 Wherefore judge not anything before the time, until the Lord come, who will cause the things which are hidden of (the) darkness to become light, and manifest the counsels of the hearts; and then shall (the) honour of each one be to him from God.
4:6 But these things, my brethren, I took in form to myself and Apollō because of you, that in us ye might learn not to be beyond the things which are written, that one should not exalt himself for one against his neighbour.
4:7 For who maketh thee to differ? But what hast thou which thou receivedst not? But if thou wast also the receiver, why boastest thou thyself as (being) one who (lit. thou) received not ?
4:8 Already ye were satisfied, already ye were made rich without us ye reigned: and I would that ye had reigned, that we also might share with you in reigning.
4:9 For I think that God manifested us, namely, the apostles last, as sentenced to death, because we became a spectacle to the world and the angels and the men.
4:10 We are fools because of Christ, ye are wise in Christ; we (are) weak, but ye are strong; ye are honoured, but we are despised.
4:11 Up to this hour we hunger, and we thirst, we are naked, and we are buffeted, and we are not settled;
4:12 we toil, working with our own hands: they rail at us, and we bless them; being persecuted, we are longsuffering;
4:13 being blasphemed, we beseech them: we became as the rubbish of this world. We became the filth of every one up to this hour.
4:14 I was not reproaching you, writing these things to you, but teaching you as beloved sons of mine.
4:15 For if ye have ten thousand guides in Christ, but not many fathers: in Christ Jesus through the Gospel I (pron.) begat you.
4:16 I beseech you, then, be ye like me.
4:17 Therefore I sent to you Timotheos, who is my beloved child, and faithful in the Lord: he (lit. this) will remind you of my ways in Christ Jesus, according as I teach in every place in all the churches.
4:18 But as though I come not to you, some were proud.
4:19 But I shall come to you quickly, if it be (the) wish of the Lord, and I shall know, not (the) word of them who were proud, but their power.
4:20 For the kingdom of God was not being in (the) word, but it was in [a] power.
4:21 What then wish ye? that I should come to you with (lit. in) a rod, or in [a] love of spirit of meekness?
5:1 A fornication is actually heard of among you, and a fornication such as is not among the Gentiles even, so that one should take (the) wife of his father.
5:2 And ye also are proud: and why rather mourned ye not? That he who did such a thing might be taken away from your midst.
5:3 For I indeed am not with you in the body, but I am with you in the spirit, already judging, as though being with you about him who did such a thing;
5:4 in (the) name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye should assemble together, with my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
5:5 to deliver such an one to Satan for (the) destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in (the) day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
5:6 Your boasting is not good. Ye know not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
5:7 Cleanse the old leaven from you, that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened. For our Pascha also was slain, Christ:
5:8 wherefore let us keep (our) feast not in an old leaven, nor in a leaven of malice and wickedness; but in unleavened (things) of [a] purity and [a] truth.
5:9 I wrote to you in the epistle not to mix with the fornicators:
5:10 I was not meaning the fornicators of this world, or the wrongdoers, or the extortioners, or the idolaters; otherwise ye ought (imperf.) to come out of this world:
5:11 but now I wrote to you not to mix with them. If there is one who is named 'Brother ' who (is) a fornicator, or a wrongdoer, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one join not even in eating.
5:12 For what have I to do to judge them who are outside? Judge ye them who are within,
5:13 but God shall judge them who are outside. Take away from you the evil (man).
6:1 There is one (who) will dare among you, having a Matthewter between him and his neighbour, to take judgement from the wrongdoers, and not from the saints.
6:2 Or know ye not that the saints will judge the world? And if the world will be judged before you, ye were not being worthy then of small places of judgement.
6:3 Ye know not that we shall (lit. will) judge angels. Much more then things of this life.
6:4 If indeed then ye have places of judgement of this life, them who are despised in the church, these cause to sit (in judgement).
6:5 I am saying it for a reproach to you. Thus there is not any wise man among you for whom it is possible to decide between his brother.
6:6 But a brother with a brother is going to take judgement, and this before the unbelievers.
6:7 Already indeed is it altogether a humiliation to you, that ye have judgement between one and another of you. Why rather do ye not suffer wrong Why not rather b be defrauded?
6:8 But ye (are they) who do wrong, and who defraud, and this your brethren.
6:9 Or know ye not that the wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God? Go not astray then; neither fornicator, nor idolater, nor adulterer, nor effeminate, nor sleeper with male,
6:10 nor thief, nor wrongdoer, nor drunkard, nor insolent, nor extortioner will inherit the kingdom of God.
6:11 And these things were some (of) you: but ye were washed, but ye were sanctified, but ye were justified in (the) name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of our God.
6:12 It is lawful for me as to everything, but all are not profitable: it is lawful for me to do everything, but no one shall be able to be in authority over me.
6:13 The meats were for the belly, and the belly for the meats: but this (belly), and the others (i.e. the meats) God will do away with. But the body was not being for [the] fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body:
6:14 but God raised our Lord, and us also shall he raise through his power.
6:15 Ye know not that your bodies are members of Christ. (Is it) that I should take away, then, the members of Christ, and make them members of (a) harlot? It shall not be.
6:16 Or know ye not that he who joineth himself to the harlot is one body? For they two shall become, he said, one flesh.
6:17 But he who joineth himself to the Lord (is) one spirit.
6:18 Flee from [the] fornication. Every sin which the man will do is outside of the body; but he who committeth fornication sinned against his own body.
6:19 Or know ye not, that your bodies are a temple of the holy spirit which is in you, which ye received from God? And ye are not your own;
6:20 ye were bought with a price: glorify God in your bodies.
7:1 But concerning the things which ye wrote to me: it is good for the man not to touch (a) woman.
7:2 But because of the fornications, let each one have his wife, and let each one (fem.) have her husband.
7:3 Let the husband give that which he ought to the wife: thus also the wife, let her give that which she ought to her husband.
7:4 The wife hath not authority over her own body, but it is the husband: but thus also the husband hath not authority over his own body, but it is the wife.
7:5 Defraud not one another, except perhaps in [a] consent for a time; that ye may devote (yourselves) to [the] prayer, and again come together, that Satan may not tempt you because of your incontinency.
7:6 But this I say according to a concession, not according to commandment.
7:7 But I wish that every man should be like me, but each one has a grace from God; the one indeed in this manner, but another in this other manner.
7:8 But I say to them who married (lit. 'took' thus again) not, and the widows, that it is good for them, should they abide thus.
7:9 But if they will not be able to contain, let them marry: for it is better (lit. good) to marry than to burn (lit. take fire).
7:10 But to them who married I order, not I but the Lord, the wife that she should not be separated from her husband:
7:11 though, if she should be separated, let her stay without marrying; otherwise let her be reconciled to her husband; and the husband, that he should not put the wife (away).
7:12 But to (the) rest say I (pron.), not the Lord: If there is a brother who hath an unbelieving wife, and this (wife) consent to dwell with him, let him not leave her.
7:13 And a wife who hath an unbelieving husband, and this (man) is consenting to dwell with her, let her not leave the husband.'
7:14 For the unbelieving husband was sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife was sanctified in the brother: otherwise then your children are unclean; but now they are holy.
7:15 And if the unbelieving will be separated, let him be separated: not in bondage (lit. servant) is the brother or the sister in such cases: God called you in [a] peace.
7:16 For how (lit. where) knewest thou, [the] wife, that perhaps thou wilt be able to save thy husband? Or how (lit. where) knewest thou, [the] man, that perhaps thou wilt be able to save thy wife?
7:17 (It must not be) except in the manner which God ordained for each one, as God called each, thus let him walk. Thus also I command in all the churches.
7:18 One was called being circumcised. Let him not become uncircumcised. One was called in [the] uncircumcision. Let him not be circumcised.
7:19 For (the) circumcision is nothing, and [the] uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.
7:20 Let each one, in the calling in which he was called, abide.
7:21 Thou wast called being a servant. Let it not be a care to thee: but if it is possible for thee to become free, become it rather.
7:22 For the servant who was called in the Lord is a freedman of the Lord: thus also the freeman who was called is a servant of Christ.
7:23 Ye were bought with a price; become not servant to [the] men.
7:24 Let each one, my brethren, in that in which he was called, in this abide with God.
7:25 But concerning the virgins I have not commandment from the Lord: but an opinion I give, as having had mercy (shown) me by the Lord to be faithful.
7:26 I think, then, that this is good [a to be] because of the existing necessity, that it is good for the man to be thus.
7:27 Thou art bound to (a) wife: seek not for loosing thyself. Thou art loosed from (a) wife: seek not for (a) wife.
7:28 If, however, thou shouldst marry, thou sinnedst not. And if the virgin should marry, she sinneth not. But such shall receive a tribulation of their flesh: but I (pron.) spare you.
7:29 But this I say, my brethren, that (the) time is shortened, that henceforth they who have wives should be as they who have not;
7:30 they who weep, as that they weep not; they who rejoice, as that they rejoice not; they who buy, as that they lay not hold;
7:31 they who use the world, as that they use 'not to the full: for the fashion of this world will pass away.
7:32 But I wish you to be (lit. being) without care. He who married not was careful for the things of the Lord, how he will please the Lord:
7:33 but he who married was careful for the world, how he will please his wife,
7:34 and he is divided. The wife who married not and the virgin. She who married not was careful for the things of the Lord, that she might be holy in her body and her spirit: but. she who married was careful for the things of the world, how she will please her husband.
7:35 But this I say because of that which is profitable to you, not that I might cast a noose over you, but that your fashion may he seemly, and that ye may rest with perseverance on the Lord undistractedly.
7:36 But if there is one (who) thinks to receive shame about his virgin; if he should have passed the marriageable prime, and this is that which ought to be, let him do his will, he sinneth not; let them marry.
7:37 But he who standeth in his heart confirmed, no necessity affecting a him, having authority concerning his own will, and this very thing he judgeth in his heart, to keep his virgin, he will do well.
7:38 Wherefore he who giveth his virgin unto a marriage will do well; and he who giveth not his (daughter) will do a betters thing.
7:39 The wife is bound unto her husband for so long time as he liveth; but if her husband should have slept, she is (a) free to marry according to her will, only in the Lord.
7:40 But more blessed is she if she should stay thus, according to my opinion: but I think also that there is a spirit of God in me.
8:1 But concerning the things slain for idols: we know that there is a knowledge in us all. (The) knowledge exalteth, but [the] love edifieth.
8:2 He who saith: I knew something,' knoweth not yet according as it is right to know;
8:3 but he who loveth God, the same (lit. this) was known by him,
8:4 Concerning the meats, then, of the things slain for idols, we know that (an) idol is nothing in the world , and that there is no God except one.
8:5 For even if there are some being called God,' whether in (the) heaven, or upon the earth; as there are many gods and many lords.
8:6 But to us (pron.) one is God the Father, through whom are all things, and we also into him; one is our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we also through him.
8:7 But (the) knowledge (is) not in all. For some up to now in the custom of the idols eat it as a thing slain for idols; and their conscience being weak unto them is polluted.
8:8 But (it is) not a meat which will commend us to God: neither, should we eat not, shall (lit. will) we be deficient; neither, should we eat, shall (lit. will) we abound.
8:9 But see lest by any means this your authority should be a stumbling-block to them who are weak;
8:10 should one see thee, namely he who hath (the) knowledge, reclining in a place of idols. Will 'nct his conscience, being of one weak, be encouraged a to cause him to eat a thing slain for idols?
8:11 For he who is weak is destroyed in thy knowledge, the brother for whom Christ died.
8:12 But thus, sinning against (0 the brethren, and striking their weak conscience, ye sinned against (e) Christ.
8:13 Therefore, if a meat will cause my brother to offend, I shall not eat flesh at all b, that I may not cause my brother to offend.
9:1 Am I not free? Am not I an apostle? Saw I not Jesus Christ our Lord? Are not ye my work in the Lord?
9:2 If I am not an apostle to others, but I am to you: for the seal of my apostleship are ye in the Lord.
9:3 My defence to them who search me is this.
9:4 Have we not authority to eat and to drink?
9:5 Have we authority to cause a sister as wife to walk after us, as (the) rest of the apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Kēpha?
9:6 Or I only and Barnabas, have not we authority not to work?
9:7 Who ever becometh soldier from his own pay? Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth from his fruit? Or who tendeth a flock of sheep, and eateth not from (the) milk of the flock?
9:8 Spake I these things according to man, or saith not the law also itself these things?
9:9 For it is written in (the) law of Moses: 'Thou shalt not muzzle (the) ox, threshing.' Was it a care to God for the oxen?
9:10 Or altogether he said it because of us? For it was written because of us: because it is worthy that he who plougheth should plough in [a] hope; and he who thresheth should hope to receive.
9:11 If we (pron.) sowed to you the spiritual things, it is great if we should reap your earned thing.
9:12 If others have authority over you, much rather we. But (a) we used not this authority; but we are long-suffering in all things, that we may not give any stumbling-block to the Gospel of Christ.
9:13 Ye know not that they who work (for) the temples eat from the things of the temple, and they who wait upon the altar are divided unto with the altar.
9:14 Thus the Lord also ordained to them who proclaim the Gospel to live from the Gospel.
9:15 But I used not any of these: but I wrote not these, that they should be done thus in me: for it is good for me rather to die than that any should [not] make my boast void.
9:16 For if I should preach good tidings, it is not to me [a] boasting; for a necessity is laid upon me; for woe to me if I should not preach good tidings.
9:17 For if I did this willingly, then I have reward: if not willingly, then I was entrusted with a stewardship.
9:18 What then is my reward? That, preaching good tidings, I may make the Gospel without expense, (so as) not to use this authority in the Gospel.
9:19 For being free from all, I made myself servant of all, that I might gain the more.
9:20 I became to the Jews as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; I became to them who are under (the) law as being under (the) law, (though) I am not under (the) law, that I might gain them who are under (the) law.
9:21 I became to them without law as one without law, though I am not one without law of God, but being under (the) law of Christ, that I might gain them without law.
9:22 I became to them who are weak as one weak, that I might gain them who are weak: I became to all men all kinds, that by all means I might save some.
9:23 But I do all these things because of the Gospel, that I may share it (with others).
9:24 Ye know not that they who run in the stadium, run indeed all, but one receiveth the palm. But thus run, that ye may attain.
9:25 But every one who striveth for the mastery layeth hold on himself in everything: they indeed, that they may receive a crown which will perish; but we an imperishable.
9:26 But I (pron.) run thus, as not covertly; thus I fight, not as beating the air:
9:27 but I bruise my body, and I make it servant: lest by any means, having proclaimed to others, I myself should be found [being] reprobate.
10:1 For I wish you not to be (lit. being) ignorant, my brethren, that all our fathers were being under the cloud, and they all passed through the sea;
10:2 and they were all baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;
10:3 and the same spiritual food they all ate;
10:4 and the same spiritual drink they all drank: for they were drinking from a spiritual rock, following them: but the rock was Christ.
10:5 But God was not well pleased with most of them: for they were overthrown in (the) desert.
10:6 But these things became to us types, that we should not be [being] lusters after evil things, according as those lusted.
10:7 Neither be ye idolaters, as some among them; as it is written: 'The people sat down to eat and to drink; and they arose to play.'
10:8 Neither let us commit fornication, as some among them committed, and twenty-three thousand fell in one day.
10:9 Neither let us tempt Christ, according as some among them tempted; and they were destroyed by the serpents.
10:10 Neither let us be murmurers, according as some among them murmured; and they were destroyed by the destroyer.
10:11 But all these things happened as type to those; but they were written for us for a teaching, namely those to whom (the) end of the ages occurred.
10:12 Wherefore he who thinketh that he standeth, let him see lest by any means he fall.
10:13 The temptation took you not, except the temptation of man: faithful is God, who will not let you be tempted beyond that which it is possible for you (to bear); but he will help with you in the temptation, that ye may be able to bear until ye come out of it.
10:14 Therefore, my beloved, flee from the idolatry.
10:15 I say it to you as (to) wise; judge ye that which I say.
10:16 The cup of the Eulogia which we bless, is it not the sharing of (the) blood of Christ? The loaf which we break, is it not the sharing of (the) body of Christ?
10:17 Because we (pron.) are one loaf, one body, namely the many: for we (pron.) all receive from the same loaf.
10:18 See Israel according to flesh: are not they who eat of the sacrifices sharers with the altar?
10:19 What then say I? 'The thing slain for idols, what is it?' or 'what itself is (an) idol?'
10:20 But that the things which the Gentiles slay, they slay them for the idols, and not God. But I wish you not to be (lit. being) sharers with the demons.
10:21 It is not possible for you to drink from the cup of the Lord and the cup of the demons: it is not possible for you to receive from the table of the Lord and the table of the demons.
10:22 Or are we to rouse the jealousy of the Lord? Are we stronger than he?
10:23 It is lawful to do everything; but all things are not profitable. It is lawful to do everything; but all things edify not.
10:24 Let not any seek for his own, but for that of his neighbour.
10:25 All things which are sold in the meat-market eat, making no enquiry because of the conscience;
10:26 for the earth is the Lord's, and its fulness.
10:27 If one of the unbelievers invite you, and ye wish, go. All things which they will set before you, eat, making no enquiry because of the conscience.
10:28 But if one should say to you: This is a thing slain for idols,' eat not, because of him who showed to you, and because of the conscience;
10:29 but I say because of a conscience: it is not thine, but that of thy neighbour. For why will my liberty be judged by another conscience?
10:30 If I (pron.) receive in [a] thanksgiving, why am I blasphemed about that for which I (pron.) give thanks?
10:31 Whether, then, ye eat, or ye drink, or ye do (any) other thing, do all things unto the glorifying God.
10:32 And be ye offenceless to the Jews and the Greeks and the church of God:
10:33 according as I also in all things please all, not seeking for mine own profit, but that of the many, that they may be saved.
11:1 Be ye like me, according as I also am like Christ.
11:2 But I honour you because ye remember me in all things, and according as I delivered to you the traditions, ye lay hold on them.
11:3 I wish you to know (lit, knowing) that (the) head of every man is Christ, but (the) head of the woman is her husband, but (the) head of Christ is God.
11:4 Every man who prayeth or prophesieth, having his head covered, is shaming his head.
11:5 But every woman praying or prophesying with her head not covered shameth her head: for it is one and it is the same as she whose head is shaven.
11:6 For if a woman will not cover her head, then let her shave it: if it is a dishonour unto a woman to shear her head, or to shave it, let her cover her head.
11:7 For the man indeed ought not to cover his head, because he is an image and a glory of God: but the woman--she is a glory of her husband.
11:8 For the man was not brought from the woman, but the woman from the man:
11:9 for the man was not also created because of the woman, but the woman because of the man:
11:10 therefore the woman ought to put a veil upon her head because of the angels.
11:11 Nevertheless neither is a woman without man nor man without woman in the Lord.
11:12 For according as the woman is [a] from the man, thus also the man is [a] through a the woman; all things are from God.
11:13 Judge in your own selves: that it was seemly for a woman to pray to God with her head not covered.
11:14 Not even [the] nature herself teacheth you, That the man indeed, if he have long hair, it is a dishonour to him.
11:15 But the woman, if she have long hair, it is a glory to her; because the hair was given to her instead of a veil.
11:16 But if (any) one thinketh to be contentious, [but] we (pron.) have not such a custom, neither the churches of God.
11:17 But ordering this I was not justifying you, because ye assemble not for the better, but the worse.
11:18 For first indeed, being about to assemble together in the church, I hear of divisions being among you, and. I partly believe (it).
11:19 For there must be heresies among you, that the chosen also who are among you might be manifested.
11:20 Being about to assemble, then, together, it is not to eat a Lord's Supper:
11:21 for each one taketh before (another) from his supper to eat; there is (one) who is hungry indeed, but there is (one) who is drunken.
11:22 For have ye not houses to eat and to drink (in)? Or despised ye the church of God, and shamed them who have not? What shall (lit. will, thus again) I say to you? (Is it) that I justify you in this? I shall not justify you.
11:23 For I (pron.) received from the Lord that which I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was about to be betrayed (lit. given) took a loaf;
11:24 and he gave thanks, he brake it, and he said: 'This is my body, which will be given for you: this do for remembrance of me.'
11:25 Thus also the cup after the supper, saying: 'This cup is the new testament in my blood. This do every time (in) which ye will drink it, remembering me.'
11:26 For every time (in) which ye will eat this bread and drink this cup, ye area proclaiming (the) death of the Lord until he come.
11:27 Wherefore he who will eat from this bread and drink from this cup of the Lord unworthily shall be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord.
11:28 But let the man prove himself, and thus let him eat from the bread and drink from the cup.
11:29 For he who eateth and who drinketh, ate and drank for a judgement to him, not (being) discerner of the body.
11:30 Therefore many are weak among you, and they are in pain; and many sleep.
11:31 For if we were discerning ourselves, we should not be judged.
11:32 For God is judging us, teaching us, that we may not be condemned with the Gentiles.
11:33 Wherefore then, my brethren, should ye assemble to eat, stay for one another.
11:34 If there is he who is hungry, let him eat in his house; that ye may not assemble for a judgement. But (the) rest (of the things), should I come, I shall ordain.
12:1 But concerning the spiritual (gifts), my brethren, I wish you not to be (lit. being) ignorant.
12:2 Ye know that, being Gentiles, being under the voiceless idols, ye were walking (along) as ye were led.
12:3 Therefore I show to you, that no one speaking in the spirit of God saith that Jesus is an anathema; and it is not possible that any should say that Jesus (is) the Lord except in a holy spirit.
12:4 But there are distributions existing of graces, though it is the same spirit.
12:5 And there are distributions existing of ministrations, though it is the same Lord.
12:6 And there are distributions of works, though it is the same God who worketh all things in all.
12:7 But to each one is given (the) manifestation of the spirit according to that which is profitable.
12:8 For to one indeed is given through the spirit a word of wisdom; but to another a word of knowledge according to the same spirit:
12:9 but to another [a] faith in the same spirit; but to another graces of healing in the same spirit;
12:10 but to another works of power; but to another [a] prophecy; but to another explaining of spirit; but to another kinds of tongues; but to another an interpretation of tongues:
12:11 but all these the one which worketh in them is the same spirit, dividing to each one according as he willeth.
12:12 For according as the body is one, (yet) it hath many members, but all the members of the body are being many, but it is one body; thus Christ also.
12:13 For we also were all baptised in one spirit unto one body, whether the Jews or the Greeks or servant or free, and we were all made to drink one spirit.
12:14 For the body also is not one member, but many.
12:15 If the foot should say: I am not a hand, I am not from the body,' it is not, in consequence of this, not from the body.
12:16 And if the ear should say: I am not an eye, I am not from the body,' it is not, in consequence of this, not from the body.
12:17 If the whole body were an eye, where had been also the hearing? If the whole were an hearing, where was also the smelling?
12:18 But now God put the members each one of them in the body according as he wished.
12:19 If all were one member, where had been also the body?
12:20 But now many indeed are the members, but the body is one.
12:21 It is not possible that the eye should say to the hand: `I have no need of thee,' or again the head to the feet: 'I have no need of you.'
12:22 But rather the members of the body, of which they think that they are feeble, these are more necessary:
12:23 and those of the body, of which we think that they are unhonoured, to these we give more honour; and our ugly things have more beauty (given them);
12:24 but our beautiful things have no need: but God tempered the body, having given more honour to that which lacked;
12:25 that there might not be division in the body; but that all the members might care for one another.
12:26 And if there is a member suffering, all the members suffer with it; if there is a member glorified, all the members rejoice with it.
12:27 But ye are (the) body of Christ, and his members severally.
12:28 They indeed whom God put in the churches, first apostles, (the) second prophets, (the) third teachers, after these powers, then graces of healing, helps, guidances, kinds of tongues.
12:29 Will all be apostles? Will all be prophets? Will all be teachers? Will all be powers?
12:30 Have all graces of healing? Will all speak in tongues? Will all interpret?
12:31 But be zealous for the great graces. And yet also I shall (lit. will) show to you another greater way.
13:1 If I should speak in (the) tongue of the men and that of the angels, but I have not love, I was as a sounding brass or a clashing cymbal.
13:2 Even if I have [a] prophecy, knowing all the mysteries and all (the) knowledge; even if I have all (the) faith so as to remove mountains, but I have not love, I (am) nothing.
13:3 Even if I should give all my (goods) to cause them to eat, and give my body also that I may boast, but I have not love, I gain nothing.
13:4 [The] love is longsuffering; hopeth; love envieth not; love is not puffed up; is not proud;
13:5 is not put to shame; seeketh not for her own; is not angry; thinketh not the evil;
13:6 rejoiceth not over (the) wrongdoing, but rejoiceth over (the) truth;
13:7 is longsuffering in all things; believeth in all things; hopeth in all things: endureth in all things.
13:8 Love never falleth. Whether the prophecies--they will be done away; whether the tongues--they will cease; whether [a] knowledge--it will be done away.
13:9 For in [a] part we know, and in [a] part we prophesy:
13:10 but if the perfect should come, the in part will be done away.
13:11 Being a child, I was speaking as a child, I was meditating as a child, I was thinking as a child, when I became man I did away the things of my childhood.
13:12 For we see now through a glass in a likeness, then we shall (lit. will) see face to face. I know now in [a] part; but then (lit. in the time) I shall (lit. will) know, according as I was known.
13:13 But now these three abide, (the) faith, [the] hope, (the) love; but the great among these is [the] love.
14:1 Pursue after [the] love, but be zealous for the spiritual (gifts), but rather that ye may prophesy.
14:2 He who speaketh in (the) tongue is speaking not to the men but God; for no one heareth him: in the spirit, then, he speaketh mysteries.
14:3 But he who prophesieth spoke to the men for an edification and a comfort and a consolation.
14:4 He who speaketh in (the) tongue edified himself alone; but he who prophesieth edified a church.
14:5 But I wish you all to speak (lit. speaking) in tongues, but rather that ye should prophesy: but greater is he who prophesieth than he who speaketh in (the) tongue, except he interpret, that the church may receive an edification.
14:6 But now, my brethren, if I should come to you, speaking in tongues, what profit shall (lit. will) I give to you unless I speak to you in a revelation, or in [a] knowledge, or in a prophecy, or in a teaching?
14:7 Even the soulless things giving their voice, whether a pipe or a harp, unless they make distinction of their voice, how will they know that which is piped or that which is harped?
14:8 For if a trumpet also should give a voice not manifest, who will prepare himself for (the) war?
14:9 Thus ye also through (the) tongue, if ye should not say a word manifest, how will they know that which ye say? For ye will be as speaking unto (the) air.
14:10 There are many sorts of voice in this world, and there is not anything being voiceless.
14:11 If I should not know (the) power of the voice, I shall (lit. will) be (a) barbarian for him who speaketh, and he who speaketh to me will be (a) barbarian for me.
14:12 Thus ye also, since ye are zealous of the spiritual (gifts) unto (the) edification of the church, seek that ye may abound (in them).
14:13 Therefore he who speaketh in (the) tongue--let him pray that he may interpret.
14:14 For if I should pray in (the) tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my heart is unfruitful.
14:15 What then shall (lit. will) I do? I shall pray in the spirit, but I shall pray in the heart also; I shall sing in the spirit, but I shall sing in the heart also.
14:16 Or otherwise if thou shouldst bless in the spirit, he who filleth up (the) place of the unlearned, how will he say the Amēn upon thy thanksgiving, since that which thou sayest he knoweth it not?
14:17 For thou indeed givest thanks well, but the other one is not edified.
14:18 I give thanks to God that I speak in (the) tongue more than ye all:
14:19 but I wish to say five words in my understanding in the church, that I may instruct others, than ten thousand words in (the) tongue.
14:20 My brethren, be not children in your understandings: but be children in [the] malice, but in your understandings be of full (age).
14:21 For it is written in (the) law: 'In other tongues and in other lips I shall (lit. will) speak to this people; and thus also they shall not hearken to me, saith the Lord.'
14:22 Wherefore the tongues were being for a sign not to them who believe, but to the unbelievers: but the prophecy was being not for the unbelievers, but for them who believe.
14:23 If then the whole church should come together, and all speak in tongues, but unlearned come in or unbelievers, will they not say: 'These were mad?'
14:24 But if all are prophesying, but an unbeliever or an unlearned come in, all will convict him; all will search him (out).
14:25 The secrets of his heart will be manifested; and thus he will throw himself upon his face and worship God, manifesting that really God is among you.
14:26 What, then, is it, my brethren? If ye should assemble, each one hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a revelation, hath language of tongue, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done in an edifying.
14:27 Whether (it be) he who speaketh in (the) tongue, (let it be) by two or the most three, and a turn for (the) one, and let one interpret.
14:28 But if there is not an interpreter, let him keep silence in the church; but let him speak between himself and God.
14:29 But prophets two or three let them speak, and let the others discern.
14:30 But if a revelation be made in another sitting down, let the first keep silence.
14:31 For it is possible for you all to prophesy one by one, that all may be taught, and all find comfort;
14:32 the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets;
14:33 for God is not of division, but of peace; as it is in all the churches of the saints.
14:34 Let the women keep silence in the church, and they are not commanded to speak; but let them be subject, according as saith also the law.
14:35 But if they wish to know a thing, let them ask their men in their houses: for it is a disgrace to a woman to speak in the church.
14:36 Or did (the) word of God come from you? Or did it reach you alone?
14:37 If there is one thinking of himself that he is a prophet or a spiritual, let him know the things which I write to you, that it is a commandment of God.
14:38 But if there is one being ignorant, they are ignorant of him.
14:39 Wherefore, my brethren, be zealous of prophesying, and forbid not to speak in tongues.
14:40 But let all things be done unto an edifying and according to regulation.
15:1 But I show to you, my brethren, the Gospel with which I preached good tidings to you, which is that which ye received, this in which ye stand,
15:2 this also through which ye will be saved; because in a word I preached good tidings to you, if ye lay hold on it, except ye believed in vain.
15:3 For I delivered unto you first that which I received, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures;
15:4 and that he was buried; and that he rose in the third day according to the Scriptures;
15:5 and he appeared unto Kēpha; then he appeared to the twelve;
15:6 afterwards he appeared (to) above five hundred brethren at once, of these the majority of them abide up to now, but others fell asleep.'
15:7 Then he appeared to Jacōbos, then he appeared to all the apostles ;
15:8 but last of them all, as one born out of due time, he appeared to me also.
15:9 For I am the least a among all the apostles, being not worthy to be called ' apostle,' because that I persecuted the church of God.
15:10 But in a grace of God I am that which I am: and his grace which is in me was not void; but I toiled more than they all: but not I, but the grace of God which is with me.
15:11 Whether then I or they, we proclaim thus, and thus ye believed.
15:12 But if Christ is proclaimed, that he rose from them who are dead, how say some among you, that there will not be resurrection of the dead.
15:13 But if there will not be resurrection of the dead, then neither did Christ rise:
15:14 but if Christ rose not, then our proclaiming is void, your faith also is void.
15:15 But again we shall (lit. will) be found false witnesses of God; because we witnessed of God that he raised Christ, a whom he raised not, if then the dead will not rise.
15:16 For if the dead will not rise, then Christ rose not:
15:17 but if Christ rose not, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins.
15:18 Then they who fell asleep in Christ perished.
15:19 But if in this life only we hoped on Christ, then we are pitiable more than all men.
15:20 But now Christ rose from them who are dead, (the) firstfruits of them who fell asleep.
15:21 For since through a man (the) death happened, through man also (the) resurrection of the dead.
15:22 For as in Adam we shall (lit. will) all die, thus also in Christ we shall (lit. will) all live:
15:23 each one in his order. Firstfruits Christ, then they of Christ in his coming.
15:24 Then cometh the end whenever he should deliver the kingdom to God and the Father, if he should do away with all rule and all authority and all power.
15:25 For he must reign until he hath put all his enemies below his feet.
15:26 But the last enemy he will do away: that is to say (the) death.
15:27 He caused all things to be subject below his feet. But if he should say that all things were made subject to him, it is manifest that (it is so) except him who caused all things to be subject to him.
15:28 But if all things should be subject to him, then the Son also himself shall be subject to him who caused all things to be subject to him; that God himself may be all things in all.
15:29 Otherwise what will they do who are baptised for the dead? If the dead will not rise at all, then why are they baptised also for them?
15:30 Why are we also in danger every hour?
15:31 I am dead daily (I affirm it) by your boast, my brethren, this which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
15:32 If humanly (speaking) I fought with the wild beast in Ephesos, what is my gain? If the dead will not. rise, let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall (lit, will) die.
15:33 Go not astray: for the evil words corrupt the good hearts.
15:34 Be watchful righteously, and sin not; for an ignorance of God (it is) which is in some: I spoke to you in [a] shame.
15:35 But there is one (who) will say: 'How will the dead rise? But in what body came they?'
15:36 [The] senseless (man), that which thou (pron.) sowest, liveth not unless it die:
15:37 and that which thou sowest--the body which will be is (not, pron.) that which thou sowest, but it is a grain, naked, whether [a] wheat or another of (the) rest of the seeds;
15:38 but God giveth (a) body to it, according as he wished, and to each of the seeds he giveth their own body.
15:39 All flesh is not the same flesh, but a different flesh indeed of the men, a different flesh, of the beasts, a different flesh of the birds, different that of the fishes.
15:40 There is also a body of (the) heaven, there is a body of (the) earth; but different indeed is (the) glory of the things of (the) heaven, but different is (the) glory of the things of (the) earth.
15:41 Different is (the) glory of (the) sun, different is (the) glory of the moon, different is (the) glory of the stars; for there is a star differing from star in its glory.
15:42 Thus also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in a corruption; it will rise in an incorruption;
15:43 it is sown in a dishonour; it will rise in a glory; it is sown in a feebleness; it will rise in a power.
15:44 A psychic body is sown; a spiritual body will rise. If there is a psychic body, then there is also a spiritual body.
15:45 It was written indeed also thus: 'Adam the first man became a living soul.' But the last Adam (is) a life-giving spirit.
15:46 But the spiritual is not the first, but the psychic; after it the spiritual.
15:47 The first man is from (the) earth, one of earth: the second man is from (the) heaven.
15:48 As the one of earth, thus also the ones of earth:
15:49 and as the one of heaven, thus also the ones of heaven. And as we bore (the) image of the one of earth, let us bear the image of the one of heaven.
15:50 But this I say, my brethren, that flesh and blood will not inherit the kingdom of God; neither will (the) corruption inherit the incorruption.
15:51 Lo, a mystery I say to you: we shall (lit. will) not all fall asleep indeed, but we shall (lit, will) all be changed,
15:52 in a moment, in a twinkling of eye, at (lit. in) the last trumpet: for the trumpet shall call, and the dead shall rise incorruptible; and we also shall (lit. will) be changed.
15:53 For this which will corrupt must be clothed with the incorruption; and this which will die be clothed with the immortality.
15:54 But whenever this which will die should be clothed with the immortality, then shall come to pass the word which is written: '(The) death was swallowed up unto a victory.'
15:55 Where was thy victory, (the) death? Where was thy sting, (the) death?
15:56 For (the) sting of (the) death is (the) sin; but (the) power of (the) sin is (the) law.
15:57 But thanks be given to God, [this] who giveth the victory to us through our Lord Jesus Christ.
15:58 Wherefore, my brethren beloved, be ye stedfast, immoveable, abounding in the work of the Lord always, knowing that your toil is not void in the Lord.
16:1 But concerning the collection which was made concerning the saints, as I commanded the churches of (the) Galatia, do ye also thus.
16:2 Every first of the sabbaths let each one of you lay by him, treasuring (lit. throwing in) according as (lit. that in which) his way will prosper (lit. be straightened), lest by any means, should I come, then should be countings up.
16:3 But if I should come, them of whom ye approve, I shall send these through letters to take your grace to Jerusalem:
16:4 but if the work is worthy to cause me to go also, they shall walk with me.
16:5 But I shall come to you, if I should pass by (the) Macedonia; for I shall (lit. will) pass by (the) Macedonia.
16:6 But perchance I might stay with you, or I might spend the winter, that ye (pron.) may escort me to the place to which I shall (lit. will) go.
16:7 For I wish not to see you now, being on (the) road; for I hope to spend time with you, if the Lord should command.
16:8 I shall (lit. will) be in Ephesos until the Pentēcostē
16:9 For a great door effectual was opened to me, and (there are) many adversaries.
16:10 But if adversaries Timotheos should come, see that he may come to you without fear; for the work of the Lord he worketh, as also I (do).
16:11 Let no one then despise him: but escort him in [a] peace that he may come to me: for I expect him with the brethren.
16:12 But concerning Apollo the brother, I besought him very much that he might come to you with the brethren: and it is not at all (the) wish that he should come now; but he shall come to you if he should find (the) opportunity.
16:13 Watch, then, and stand in (the) faith; master yourselves, and take courage.
16:14 Let all works which are yours be done in [a] love.
16:15 I beseech you, then, our brethren--ye know (the) house of Stephana and Phortounatos, that it is (the) beginning of [the] Achaia, and they ordained themselves to a ministry of the saints,
16:16 that ye also be subject to such, and every one who is a fellow worker and who toileth.
16:17 But I rejoice over (the) coming of Stephana and Phortounatos and Achaikos, because your deficiency these filled up.
16:18 For they rested my spirit and yours: know, then, such (persons).
16:19 The churches of [the] Asia salute you. Akula and Priska salute you very much in the Lord, with the church of their house.
16:20 All the brethren who are with me salute you. Salute one another in an holy kiss.
16:21 My salutation in my hand, I Paul.
16:22 He who loveth not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be an anathema. Maran atha.
16:23 (The) grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with you.
16:24 My love with you all in Christ Jesus. Amēn.
16:25