1:2 That which was (ET) from (the) beginning, that which we heard, that which we saw with our eyes, that which we gazed at, and our hands handled, concerning the word of (the) life:
1:3 and the life was manifested, and we saw it, and we witness, and we show to you the eternal life, that which was with the Father, and it was manifested to us;
1:4 that which we saw and we heard we proclaim to you, that ye also--that there may be a fellowship to you with us; but our fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ.
1:5 And these things we write to you, that your joy may be complete.
1:6 And this is the promise which we heard from him; we proclaim it to you, that God is [a] light, and there is not any darkness in him.
1:7 If we should say that we have a fellowship with him, and are walking in the darkness, we are saying false, and we do not (the) truth:
1:8 if we should walk in the light, as he also walketh in the light, we have a fellowship with one another, and (the) blood of Jesus his Son will cleanse us from all sin.
1:9 If we should say that we have not sin, we deceive ourselves, and (the) truth is not in us.
1:10 If we should confess our sins, he is faithful and is righteous that he should forgive us our sins, and he will cleanse us from all wrongdoing.
1:11 If we should say that we sinned not, we make him false, and his word is not in us.
2:1 My children, these things I write to you, that ye may not sin. And if one should sin, we have the paraclete with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:
2:2 and he is (the) redemption of our sins; but not concerning ours only, but also concerning those of the whole world.
2:3 And in this we shall (lit. will) know that we knew him, if we should keep his commandments.
2:4 He who saith: I knew him,' and kept not his commandments is false, and (the) truth is not in this (one):
2:5 he who will keep his word, truly the love of God was completed in this (one). In this we shall (lit. will) know that we are in him:
2:6 he who saith: 'I abide (son) in him,' ought as he walked to walk also thus.
2:7 My beloved, (it is) not a new commandment which I write to you, but it is an old commandment, this which ye were having from (the) beginning, the old commandment, the word which ye heard.
2:8 Again, (it is) a new commandment which I write to you, this in which there is [a] truth and in you, because the darkness will pass away, the true light now shineth.
2:9 He who saith: I am in the light,' and he hateth his brother was in the darkness until now.
2:10 He who loveth his brother abode (on) in the light, and there is not occasion of stumbling in him.
2:11 He who hateth his brother was in the darkness, and he walked in the darkness, and he knoweth not whither he walked. Because the darkness blinded his eyes.
2:12 I write to you, [the] children, because your sins will be forgiven you because of his name.
2:13 I write to you, [the] fathers, because ye know him who is from (the) beginning. I write to you, [the] young men, because ye conquer the evil (one).
2:14 I wrote to you, [the] children, because ye know the Father. I wrote to you, [the] fathers, because ye know him who is from (the) beginning. I wrote to you, [the] young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth (in you, and ye conquered the evil (one).
2:15 Love not the world, nor the things which are in the world. But if one should love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
2:16 Because everything which is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the arrogancy of this life, these are not from the Father, but they are from the world.
2:17 And the world will pass away, and its lust; but he who doeth (the) wish of God will abide for ever.
2:18 [The] children, it is (the) last hour: and according as ye heard that the antichrist is coming, now, lo, many antichrists came; in this we shall (lit. will) know, that it is (the) last hour.
2:19 They came from us, but they are not from us; had they been from us, they would have abode with us: but that they might be manifested that all are not from us.
2:20 And ye also have an anointing from the holy (one), and ye know all things.
2:21 I wrote not to you, because ye know not (the) truth, but because ye know it, that all false (ones) are not from (the) truth.
2:22 Who is the false (one) except him who denieth that Jesus is [not] Christ? This is the antichrist, because he who denieth (the) Father, denieth also the Son.christ, that denieth the Father and the Son.
2:23 And every one who denieth the Son hath not the Father also: he who confesseth the Son hath the Father also.
2:24 Ye also--let that which ye heard, from (the) beginning abide in you. But if that which ye heard from (the) beginning should abide in you, ye also shall abide in the Son and the Father.
2:25 This is the promise which he himself promised to us, the eternal life.
2:26 These things I wrote to you concerning them who lead you astray.
2:27 And ye--the anointing which ye received of him abideth in you; and ye need not (me) to write to you; or that one should teach you; but as the same spirit teacheth you concerning all things, and is true; it is not false: according as it instructed you, abide in it.
2:28 And now also, my children, abide in him; that, if he should be manifested, ye will have [a] boldness, and will not be ashamed from him in his coming.
2:29 If ye should see that he is righteous, know that every one who doeth [the] righteousness was born from him.
3:1 See how great love the Father gave to us, that we should be called The children of God': we are such (lit. some). Therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew not him.
3:2 My beloved, now we (are) children of God, and it is not yet manifested of what kind we were to be; but we know that, should he be manifested, we shall (lit. will) be like him; because we see him according as he is.
3:3 Every one who hath this hope, purifieth himself in him, according as he is pure.
3:4 Every one who doeth (the) sin, doeth also [the] lawlessness: for (the) sin is (the) lawlessness.
3:5 And we know that he was manifested, that he might take away the sins; and (the) sin is not in him.
3:6 Every one who abideth in him sinneth not: every one who doeth (the) sin saw not him, nor knew him.
3:7 [The] children, let not any one lead you astray: he who doeth [the] righteousness is righteous, according as he is righteous.
3:8 But he who doeth (the) sin is from the devil; because the devil sinneth from (the) beginning. Therefore (the) Son of God was manifested, that he might pull clown the works of the devil.
3:9 Every one who was born from God sinneth not, because there is a seed of his abiding in him: and it is not possible for him to sin, because he was born from God.
3:10 In this are manifested the children of God, and the children of the devil. Every one who doeth not (the) righteousness is not from God, and he who loveth not his brother.
3:11 Because this is the promise which ye heard from (the) beginning, that ye should love one another:
3:12 not according as Kain, who was from the evil (one), and he killed his brother. Why killed he him? Because his works were being evil, but those of his brother were righteous.
3:13 But wonder not, my brethren, if the world hateth you.
3:14 We (pron.) know that we removed from (the) death into (the) life because we love the brethren. He who loveth not abode in (the) death.
3:15 Every one who hateth his brother is a murderer: and we know that no murderers haves eternal life abiding in them.
3:16 In this we knew [the] love, that he laid (down) his life for us: and we also ought to lay (down) our lives for one another.
3:17 But he who hath a life of this world, and seeth his brother having need, and shutteth up his tender mercies from him, how will the love of God abide in him
3:18 My children, let us not love in (the) word, nor in (the) tongue; but in (the) deed and [the] truth.
3:19 In this we shall (lit. will) know that we (are) from [the] truth, and we shall (lit. will) persuade ourselves before him.
3:20 Because if our heart should condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and he knoweth all things.
3:21 My beloved, if our heart should not condemn, us, we have [a] boldness with God;
3:22 and that which we shall (lit. will) ask, we shall (lit. will) receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and we do that which is pleasing before him.
3:23 And this is his commandment, that we should believe (the) name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, according as he gave commandment to us.
3:24 And he who will keep his commandments abideth in him; and he also abideth in him. And in this we shall (lit. will) know that he abideth in us through the spirit which he gave to us.
4:1 My beloved, believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits, whether they are of God: because many false prophets went to the world.
4:2 In this we shall (lit. will) know the spirit of God: Every spirit which confesseth that Jesus Christ came in (the) flesh is of God:
4:3 and every spirit which confesseth not Jesus is not of God. And this is the antichrist whom ye heard that he cometh; and now he is in the world already.
4:4 Ye are children from God, and ye conquered them: because greater is he who is in you, than he who is in the world.
4:5 They (are) from the world: therefore they speak from the world, and the world heareth them.
4:6 We are of God: he who knoweth God heareth us; he who is not of God heareth not us. In this we shall (lit. will) know the spirit of the truth, and the spirit of the error.
4:7 My beloved, let us love one another: because the love is of God; every one who loveth was born from God, and he knoweth God.
4:8 He who loveth not knew not God; because God is [a] love.
4:9 In this the love of God was manifested in us, because God sent his only Son to the world, that we might live through him.
4:10 The love is in this. Not that we (pron.) loved God, but that he (pron.) loved us, and he sent his Son for a redemption of our sins.
4:11 My beloved, if God loved us thus, we also ought to love one another.
4:12 God no one saw ever: if we should love one another, God abideth in us, and his love is completed in us.
4:13 In this we shall (lit. will) know that we abide in him, and he also abideth in us, because he gave to us from his spirit.
4:14 And we (pron.) saw and we witness that the Father sent his Son for [a] salvation of the world.
4:15 He who will confess that Jesus is (the) Son of God, God abideth in him, and he also abideth in God.
4:16 And we (pron.) knew and we believed the love of God, which is in us. God is [a] love; and he who abideth in [the] love abideth in God, and God abideth in him.
4:17 In this [the] love was completed with us, that we might find [a] boldness in the day of the judgement; because according as he is thus we also (are) in the world.
4:18 There is not fear in [the] love: but the completed love casteth [the] fear out, because [the] fear hath [a] punishment; but he who feareth is not completed in [the] love.
4:19 We (pron.) love God, because he (pron.) loved us first.
4:20 But if one saith: love God,' and is hating his brother, he is false: for he who loveth not his brother whom he seeth, God whom he saw not, how will he be able to love him?
4:21 And this commandment we have from him, that he who loveth God should love his brother also.
5:1 Every one who believeth that Jesus (is) Christ is born from God: and every one who loveth him who begat loveth also him who was begotten from him.
5:2 In this we shall (lit. will) know that we love the children of God: If we should love God, and do his commandments.
5:3 For this is [the] love of God, that we should keep his commandments; and his commandments are not burdensome.
5:4 Because every one who was born from God conquereth the world: and this is the conquest which conquered the world, even our faith.
5:5 But who is he who is conquering the world, except him who believeth that Jesus is (the) Son of God?
5:6 This is he who came through [a] water and [a] blood and [a] spirit, Jesus Christ; not in the water only, but also in the water and in the blood. And the spirit is (that) which witnesseth, because the spirit is the truth.
5:7 Because three are they who witness,
5:8 the spirit and the water and the blood: and the three are in one.
5:9 If we receive the witness of [the] men, the witness of God is greater: because this is the witness of God, that he witnessed of his Son.
5:10 He who believeth (the) Son of God, the witness of God is in him: he who believeth not (the) Son of God made him false; because he believed not the witness, which God witnessed of his Son.
5:11 And this is the witness, that God gave to us an eternal life, and this life was in his Son.
5:12 He who hath (the) Son hath (the) life; he who hath not (the) Son of God hath not (the) life.
5:13 These things I wrote to you, that ye might know that ye have an eternal life, ye (lit. they) who believe (the) name of the Son of God.
5:14 And this is the boldness which we have toward him, that, (of) that which we shall (lit. will) ask according to his wish, he heareth us:
5:15 and if we should see that he heareth us, of that which we shall (lit. will) ask, we know that we have our petitions which we shall (lit. will) ask of him.
5:16 If one see his brother sinning a sin which is not unto (the) death, let him ask, and [a] life shall be given to him (for) those who sin not of (the sin unto the) death. There is sin leading to (the) death: I was not meaning that (sin), that he should pray concerning it.
5:17 All wrongdoing is (the) sin, and there is sin not leading to (the) death.
5:18 We know that every one who was born from God sinneth not; but the being born from God keepeth him, and the evil (one) toucheth him not.
5:19 But we know that we are from God, and the whole world lay under the evil (one).
5:20 But we know that (the) Son of God came, and he gave to us a knowledge, that we might know the true God; and we are in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and the eternal life.
5:21 My children, keep yourselves from the idols.
5:22