15:1 And David made for himself houses in the city of David, and he prepared a place for the ark of God, and made a tent for it.
15:2 Then said David, It is not lawful for any to bear the ark of God, but the Levites; for the Lord has chosen them to bear the ark of the Lord, and to minister to him for ever.
15:3 And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the Lord to the place which he had prepared for it.
15:4 And David gathered together the sons of Aaron the Levites.
15:5 Of the sons of Caath; there was Uriel the chief, and his brethren, a hundred and twenty.
15:6 Of the sons of Merari; Asaia the chief, and his brethren, two hundred and twenty.
15:7 Of the sons of Gedson; Joel the chief, and his brethren, a hundred and thirty.
15:8 Of the sons of Elisaphat; Semei the chief, and his brethren, two hundred.
15:9 Of the sons of Chebrom; Eliel the chief, and his brethren eighty.
15:10 Of the sons of Oziel; Aminadab the chief, and his brethren a hundred and twelve.
15:11 And David called Sadoc and Abiathar the priests, and the Levites, Uriel, Asaia, and Joel, and Semaia, and Eliel, and Aminadab,
15:12 and said to them, Ye are the heads of the families of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, you and your brethren, and ye shall carry up the ark of the God of Israel, to the place which I have prepared for it.
15:13 For because ye were not ready at the first, our God made a breach upon us, because we sought him not according to the ordinance.
15:14 So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves, to bring up the ark of the God of Israel.
15:15 And the sons of the Levites took the ark of God, (as Moses commanded by the word of God according to the scripture) upon their shoulders with staves.
15:16 And David said to the chiefs of the Levites, Set your brethren the singers with musical instruments, lutes, harps, and cymbals, to sound aloud with a voice of joy.
15:17 So the Levites appointed Æman the son of Joel; Asaph the son of Barachias was one of his brethren; and Æthan the son of Kisaeus was of the sons of Merari their brethren;
15:18 and with them their brethren of the second rank, Zacharias, and Oziel, and Semiramoth, and Jeiel, and Elioel, and Eliab, and Banaia, and Maasaia, and Matthathia, and Eliphena, and Makellia, and Abdedom, and Jeiel, and Ozias, the porters.
15:19 And the singers, Æman, Asaph, and Æthan, with brazen cymbals to make a sound to be heard.
15:20 Zacharias, and Oziel, Semiramoth, Jeiel, Oni, Eliab, Maasaeas, Banaeas, with lutes, on alaemoth.
15:21 And Mattathias, and Eliphalu, and Makenia, and Abdedom, and Jeiel, and Ozias, with harps of Amasenith, to make a loud noise.
15:22 And Chonenia chief of the Levites was master of the bands, because he was skilful.
15:23 And Barachia and Elcana were door-keepers of the ark.
15:24 And Somnia, and Josaphat, and Nathanael, and Amasai, and Zacharia, and Banaea, and Eliezer, the priests, were sounding with trumpets before the ark of God: and Abdedom and Jeia were door-keepers of the ark of God.
15:25 So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains of thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant from the house of Abdedom with gladness.
15:26 And it came to pass when God strengthened the Levites bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that they sacrificed seven calves and seven rams.
15:27 And David was girt with a fine linen robe, and all the Levites who were bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and the singers, and Chonenias the master of the band of singers; also upon David there was a robe of fine linen.
15:28 And all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with shouting, and with the sound of a horn, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, playing loudly on lutes and harps.
15:29 And the ark of the covenant of the Lord arrived, and came to the city of David; and Melchol the daughter of Saul looked down through the window, and saw king David dancing and playing: and she despised him in her heart.
16:1 So they brought in the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tabernacle which David pitched for it; and they offered whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before God.
16:2 And David finished offering up whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and blessed the people in the name of the Lord.
16:3 And he divided to every man of Israel (both men and women), to every man one baker’s loaf, and a cake.
16:4 And he appointed before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, Levites to minister and lift up the voice, and to give thanks and praise the Lord God of Israel:
16:5 Asaph was the chief, and next to him Zacharias, Jeiel, Semiramoth, and Jeiel, Mattathias, Eliab, and Banaeas, and Abdedom: and Jeiel sounding with musical instruments, lutes and harps, and Asaph with cymbals:
16:6 and Banaeas and Oziel the priests sounding continually with trumpets before the ark of the covenant of God in that day.
16:7 Then David first gave orders to praise the Lord by the hand of Asaph and his brethren.
16:8 Song. Give thanks to the Lord, call upon him by his name, make known his designs among the people.
16:9 Sing songs to him, and sing hymns to him, relate to all people his wonderful deeds, which the Lord has wrought.
16:10 Praise his holy name, the heart that seeks his pleasure shall rejoice.
16:11 Seek the Lord and be strong, seek his face continually.
16:12 Remember his wonderful works which he has wrought, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth;
16:13 ye seed of Israel his servants, ye seed of Jacob his chosen ones.
16:14 He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth.
16:15 Let us remember his covenant for ever, his word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
16:16 which he covenanted with Abraham, and his oath sworn to Isaac.
16:17 He confirmed it to Jacob for an ordinance, to Israel as an everlasting covenant,
16:18 saying, To thee will I give the land of Chanaan, the line of your inheritance:
16:19 when they were few in number, when they were but little, and dwelt as strangers in it;
16:20 and went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people.
16:21 He suffered not a man to oppress them, and he reproved kings for their sakes,
16:22 saying, Touch not my anointed ones, and deal not wrongfully with my prophets.
16:23 Sing ye to the Lord, all the earth; proclaim his salvation from day to day.
16:24 Declare among the nations his glory, his wondrous deeds among all peoples.
16:25 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.
16:26 For all the gods of the nations are idols; but our God made the heavens.
16:27 Glory and praise are in his presence; strength and rejoicing are in his place.
16:28 Give to the Lord, ye families of the nations, give to the Lord glory and strength.
16:29 Give to the Lord the glory belonging to his name: take gifts and offer them before him; and worship the Lord in his holy courts.
16:30 Let the whole earth fear before him; let the earth be established, and not be moved.
16:31 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth exult; and let them say among the nations, The Lord reigns.
16:32 The sea with its fullness shall resound and the tree of the field, and all things in it.
16:33 Then shall the trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord, for he is come to judge the earth.
16:34 Give thanks to the Lord, for it is good, for his mercy is for ever.
16:35 And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us, and rescue us from among the heathen, that we may praise thy holy name, and glory in thy praises.
16:36 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting and to everlasting: And all the people shall say, Amen. So they praised the Lord.
16:37 And they left there Asaph and his brethren before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, to minister before the ark continually, according to the service of each day: from day to day.
16:38 And Abdedom and his brethren were sixty and eight; and Abdedom the son of Idithun, and Osa, were to be door-keepers.
16:39 And they appointed Sadoc the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of the Lord in the high place in Gabaon,
16:40 to offer up whole-burnt-offerings continually morning and evening, and according to all things written in the law of the Lord, which he commanded the children of Israel by Moses the servant of God.
16:41 And with him were Æman and Idithun, and the rest chosen out by name to praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever.
16:42 And with them there were trumpets and cymbals to sound aloud, and musical instruments for the songs of God: and the sons of Idithun were at the gate.
16:43 And all the people went every one to his home: and David returned to bless his house.
28:1 And David assembled all the chief men of Israel, the chief of the judges, and all the chief men of the courses of attendance on the person of the king, and the captains of thousands and hundreds, and the treasurers, and the lords of his substance, and of all the king’s property, and of his sons, together with the eunuchs, and the mighty men, and the warriors of the army, at Jerusalem.
28:2 And David stood in the midst of the assembly, and said, Hear me, my brethren, and my people: it was in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and a place for the feet of our Lord, and I prepared materials suitable for the building:
28:3 but God said, Thou shalt not build me a house to call my name upon it, for thou art a man of war, and hast shed blood.
28:4 Yet the Lord God of Israel chose me out of the whole house of my father to be king over Israel for ever; and he chose Juda as the kingly house, and out of the house of Juda he chose the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he preferred me, that I should be king over all Israel.
28:5 And of all my sons, (for the Lord has given me many sons,)he has chosen Solomon my son, to set him on the throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel.
28:6 And God said to me, Solomon thy son shall build my house and my court: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be to him a father.
28:7 And I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he continue to keep my commandments, and my judgments, as at this day.
28:8 And now I charge you before the whole assembly of the Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek all the commandments of the Lord our God, that ye may inherit the good land, and leave it for your sons to inherit after you for ever.
28:9 And now, my son Solomon, know the God of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart and willing soul: for the Lord searches all hearts, and knows every thought: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou shouldest forsake him, he will forsake thee for ever.
28:10 See now, for the Lord has chosen thee to build him a house for a sanctuary, be strong and do it.
28:11 And David gave Solomon his son the plan of the temple, and its buildings, and its treasuries, and its upper chambers, and the inner store-rooms, and the place of the atonement,
28:12 and the plan which he had in his mind of the courts of the house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about, designed for the treasuries of the house of God, and of the treasuries of the holy things, and of the chambers for resting:
28:13 and the plan of the courses of the priests and Levites, for all the work of the service of the house of the Lord, and of the stores of vessels for ministration of the service of the house of the Lord.
28:14 And he gave him the account of their weight, both of gold and silver vessels.
28:15 He gave him the weight of the candlesticks, and of the lamps.
28:16 He gave him likewise the weight of the tables of shewbread, of each table of gold, and likewise of the tables of silver:
28:17 also of the flesh-hooks, and vessels for drink-offering, and golden bowls: and the weight of the gold and silver articles, and censers, and bowls, according to the weight of each.
28:18 And he shewed him the weight of the utensils of the altar of incense, which was of pure gold, and the plan of the chariot of the cherubs that spread out their wings, and overshadowed the ark of the covenant of the Lord.
28:19 David gave all to Solomon in the Lord’s handwriting, according to the knowledge given him of the work of the pattern.
28:20 And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong, and play the man, and do: fear not, neither be terrified; for the Lord my God is with thee; he will not forsake thee, and will not fail thee, until thou hast finished all the work of the service of the house of the Lord. And behold the pattern of the temple, even his house, and its treasury, and the upper chambers, and the inner store-rooms, and the place of propitiation, and the plan of the house of the Lord.
28:21 And see, here are the courses of the priests and Levites for all the service of the house of the Lord, and there shall be with thee men for every workmanship, and every one of ready skill in every art: also the chief men and all the people, ready for all thy commands.
29:1 And David the king said to all the congregation, Solomon my son, whom the Lord has chosen, is young and tender, and the work is great; for it is not for man, but for the Lord God.
29:2 I have prepared according to all my might for the house of my God gold, silver, brass, iron, wood, onyx stones, and costly and variegated stones for setting, and every precious stone, and much Parian marble.
29:3 And still farther, because I took pleasure in the house of my God, I have gold and silver which I have procured for myself, and, behold, I have given them to the house of my God over and above, beyond what I have prepared for the holy house.
29:4 Three thousand talents of gold of Suphir, and seven thousand talents of fine silver, for the overlaying of the walls of the sanctuary:
29:5 for thee to use the gold for things of gold, and the silver for things of silver, and for every work by the hand of the artificers. And who is willing to dedicate himself in work this day for the Lord?
29:6 Then the heads of families, and the princes of the children of Israel, and the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and the overseers of the works, and the king’s builders, offered willingly.
29:7 And they gave for the works of the house of the Lord five thousand talents of gold, and ten thousand gold pieces, and ten thousand talents of silver, and eighteen thousand talents of brass, and a hundred thousand talents of iron.
29:8 And they who had precious stone, gave it into the treasuries of the house of the Lord by the hand of Jeiel the Gedsonite.
29:9 And the people rejoiced because of the willingness, for they offered willingly to the Lord with a full heart: and king David rejoiced greatly.
29:10 And king David blessed the Lord before the congregation, saying, Blessed art thou, O Lord God of Israel, our Father, from everlasting and to everlasting.
29:11 Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the might: for thou art Lord of all things that are in heaven and upon the earth: before thy face every king and nation is troubled.
29:12 From thee come wealth and glory: thou, O Lord, rulest over all, the Lord of all dominion, and in thy hand is strength and rule; and thou art almighty with thy hand to increase and establish all things.
29:13 And now, Lord, we give thanks to thee, and praise thy glorious name.
29:14 But who am I, and what is my people, that we have been able to be thus forward in offering to thee? for all things are thine, and of thine own have we given thee,
29:15 for we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as all our fathers were: our days upon the earth are as a shadow, and there is no remaining.
29:16 O Lord our God, as for all this abundance which I have prepared that a house should be built to thy holy name, it is of thy hand, and all is thine.
29:17 And I know, Lord, that thou art he that searches the hearts, and thou lovest righteousness. I have willingly offered all these things in simplicity of heart; and now I have seen with joy thy people here present, willingly offering to thee.
29:18 O Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel, our fathers, preserve these things in the thought of the heart of thy people for ever, and direct their hearts to thee.
29:19 And to Solomon my son give a good heart, to perform thy commandments, and to observe thy testimonies, and thine ordinances, and to accomplish the building of thy house.
29:20 And David said to the whole congregation, Bless ye the Lord our God. And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and they bowed the knee and worshipped the Lord, and did obeisance to the king.
29:21 And David sacrificed to the Lord, and offered up whole-burnt-offerings to the Lord on the morrow after the first day, a thousand calves, a thousand rams, a thousand lambs, and their drink-offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel.
29:22 And they ate and drank joyfully that day before the Lord: and they made Solomon the son of David king a second time, and anointed him king before the Lord, and Sadoc to the priesthood.
29:23 And Solomon sat upon the throne of his father David, and was highly honoured; and all Israel obeyed him.
29:24 The princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons of king David his father, were subject to him.
29:25 And the Lord magnified Solomon over all Israel, and gave him royal glory, such as was not upon any king before him.
29:26 And David the son of Jessae reigned over Israel forty years;
29:27 seven years in Chebron, and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
29:28 And he died in a good old age, full of days, in wealth, and glory: and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.
29:29 And the rest of the acts of David, the former and the latter, are written in the history of Samuel the seer, and in the history of Nathan the prophet, and in the history of Gad the seer,
29:30 concerning all his reign, and his power, and the times which went over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the earth.