1:2 Since many took in hand (lit. threw their hand) to write words concerning the things which were fulfilled among us,
1:3 according as the first (men), who saw (them) and became ministers of the word, delivered to us,
1:4 it was pleasing to me also, having traced everything accurately (lit. in certainty), so to write to thee, most excellent Theophilus;
1:5 that thou mightest know the certainty of the words in which thou wast instructed.
1:6 It came to pass in the days of Herod (the) king of Judea, (that) there was a priest, his name being Zacharias, of the ministry-days of Abia, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was (lit. is) Elisabet.
1:7 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and the ordinances of the Lord, being blameless.
1:8 And they had no son, because Elisabet was barren, and they both had grown (old) in their days.
1:9 And it came to pass (that in) doing his priestly-office in the order of his ministry-days before God,
1:10 according to the custom of the priestly-office his lot was to offer up incense. And he went into the temple of the Lord:
1:11 and all the multitude of the people were praying outside at (the) hour of the incense.
1:12 And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right hand of the altar of the incense.
1:13 And Zacharias having seen, was troubled, and fear came upon him.
1:14 But the angel said to him: Fear not, Zacharias: because thy prayer was heard, and thy wife Elisabet shall bear thee a son. And thou shalt call his name "John."
1:15 And joy shall be to thee, and gladness; and many shall rejoice over his birth.
1:16 For he will be great before the Lord, and wine and strong drink he shall not drink; and he will be filled with the (lit. a) Holy Spirit from (the time of) being in (the) womb of his mother.
1:17 And he shall make many of (the) sons of Israel return to the Lord their God.
1:18 And he will be first to come before in front of him in the (lit. a) spirit and power of Elias, to turn (the) heart of fathers to their sons, and them who are disobedient to (lit. in) the wisdom of the righteous, to prepare for the Lord a people which was justified.'
1:19 And Zacharias said to the angel By (lit. in) what shall (lit. will) I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife grew (old) in her days.'
1:20 And the angel answered, he said to him: I am Gabriel, he who standeth before God; and I was sent to speak to thee, and to preach to thee these glad tidings.
1:21 And lo, thou shalt be holding thy peace, and it is not possible for thee to speak, until the day in which these (things) will be done, because that thou believedst not my words--these which will be fulfilled in their time.'
1:22 And all the people were looking for Zacharias, and were wondering because that he delayed within the temple.
1:23 And having come out, he was not able to speak to them: and they knew that he saw a vision within the temple: and he was beckoning to them, and remained dumb.
1:24 And it came to pass, (that) his ministry-days having been completed, he went to his house.
1:25 And after those days Elisabet his wife conceived; and she was hiding herself five months, saying:
1:26 Thus the Lord did to me in the days in which he looked upon me, to take away my reproach among the men.'
1:27 Now in the sixth month Gabriel the angel was sent by God to a city of Galilee, its name being Nazareth,
1:28 to a virgin who was betrothed to a man, his name being Joseph, of (the) house of David; and (the) name of the virgin is Mariam.
1:29 And having gone in unto her, he said to her: Hail, thou (lit. she) who art full of grace, the Lord (is) with thee.'
1:30 But she was troubled at this word, and was reasoning what kind is this salutation.
1:31 And the angel said to her: Fear not, Mariam, for thou foundest grace before God.
1:32 And lo, thou wilt conceive, and bear a son, and shalt call his name "Jesus."
1:33 He (lit. this) shall be great, and he shall be called "(the) Son of the Highest" (lit. that, or him who is high): and the Lord God shall give to him (the) throne of David his father:
1:34 and he will be king over (the) house of Jacob for ever; and there shall not be (an) end of his kingdom.'
1:35 And Mariam said to the angel: 'How will this be to me, since I know not (a) husband?'
1:36 And the angel answered, he said to her: The (lit. a) Holy Spirit will come upon thee, and the (lit. a) power of the Highest (as before) will overshadow thee: therefore he (or that) who will be born is holy; he shall be called "(the) Son of God."
1:37 And behold, Elisabet, thy kinswoman, also conceived a son in her old age: and this is her sixth month--she who is called "the barren."
1:38 Because there is not any word impossible with God.'
1:39 And Mariam said: a Lo, the handmaid of the Lord; it shall be to me according to thy word.' And the angel went from her.
1:40 And Mariam rose in those days, she went in haste to the hill-country to a city of Juda;
1:41 and she entered (the) house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabet.
1:42 And it came to pass (that) Elisabet having heard the salutation of Mariam, the babe moved in her womb. And Elisabet was filled with the (lit. a) Holy Spirit;
1:43 and she cried out (lit. up) with a loud voice, and said: a Blessed art thou among the women, and blessed is (the) fruit of thy womb.
1:44 Whence is this to me, that (the) mother of my Lord should come to me?
1:45 For lo, as soon as (the) voice of thy salutation was in mine ears, the babe moved for gladness in my womb.
1:46 And blessed is she who believed; because there will be (the) fulfilment of the things which were spoken to her by the Lord.'
1:47 And Mariam said: My soul exalted the Lord,
1:48 and my spirit was glad over God my Saviour.
1:49 Because he looked down upon (the) humbleness of his handmaid: for lo, henceforth all generations will call me blessed.
1:50 Because he who is strong did to me great things (lit. greatnesses); and his name is holy.
1:51 And his pity is unto generations and generations for them who fear him.
1:52 He made strength in his arm; be scattered the proud in (the) thought of their heart.
1:53 He hurled strong (ones) from thrones, and he exalted them who are humble.
1:54 Them who were hungry he satisfied with good, and them who were rich he sent away empty.
1:55 He helped Israel his child, to remember his pity,
1:56 according as he spake to our fathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.'
1:57 And Mariam was with her three months, and returned to her house.
1:58 Now the time was completed to Elisabet for her bearing; and she bare a son.
1:59 And they who were around her house, and her kinsfolk heard that the Lord magnified his pity for (lit. with) her; and they were rejoicing with her.
1:60 And it came to pass on the eighth day, (that) they came that they might circumcise the child; and they were calling him by (lit. to the) name of his father Zacharias.
1:61 And his mother answered, she said: Nay; but call his name "John."'
1:62 And they said to her: There is not any among thy kindred who is called by this name.'
1:63 And they beckoned to his father: What wishedst thou to call him?
1:64 And having asked for a tablet, he wrote, saying: John is his name.' And they wondered all.
1:65 And his mouth opened suddenly, and his tongue; and he was speaking, blessing God.
1:66 And fear was upon all who were around them: and they were speaking all these (things) on the hill-country of Juda.
1:67 And they who heard were all reasoning in their heart, saying: What then will be to this child? ' For (the) hand of the Lord was (imperf.) with him.
1:68 And Zacharias his father was filled with the (lit. a) Holy Spirit, and he prophesied, saying:
1:69 Blessed is the Lord God of Israel; because he visited and made redemption for his people.
1:70 And he raised up a horn of salvation for us in (the) house of David his child,
1:71 according as he spake from the mouths of his holy prophets since (the) age,
1:72 salvation from our enemies and from (the) hands of all who hate us,
1:73 to shew (lit. do) pity for (lit. with) our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant;
1:74 the oath which he sware to Abraham our father,
1:75 for the giving to us, without fear, having been saved from (the) hands of our enemies, to serve him,
1:76 in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
1:77 And thou indeed, Child, shalt be called "The prophet of the Highest;" for thou wilt be first in walking before the Lord to prepare his roads;
1:78 to give knowledge of (the) salvation to his people in forgiveness of sins,
1:79 because of the compassions of (the) pity of our God, [in] these in which he is to visit us as a dayspring from (the) height,
1:80 to give light to them who sit in (the) darkness and (the) shadow of (the) death; for (the) directing our feet to (the) road of the peace.'
1:81 And the child grew, and was being strengthened in the Spirit, and was (imperf.) in the deserts unto the day of his appearing unto Israel.
2:1 It came to pass in those days (that) a decree came forth from (the) king Augustus that all the world should give in its name to be written.
2:2 This is the first enrolment which was made, Kyrinnios being governor of Syria.
2:3 And all were going to write their name each one at his city.
2:4 And Joseph also came up from Galilee from a city Nazareth' into a city of David called Bethlehem, because that he is from (the) house and family of David;
2:5 to write his name with Mariam, who was betrothed to him, being with child.
2:6 And it came to pass (that), they being there, her days were completed for her bearing.
2:7 And she bare her son the firstborn; and she wrapped him, she laid him in a manger, because they had not place in the place of lodging.
2:8 And there were shepherds feeding in that country in (the) field, and watching in the watches of the night over their flock of sheep.
2:9 And lo, an angel of the Lord stood over them, and the (lit. a) glory of the Lord gave light to them, and they feared with a very great fear.
2:10 And the angel said to them: Fear not; for lo, I preach glad tidings to you of great joy, which (lit. this which) will be to all the people:
2:11 because there was born for you to-day a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord, in (the) city of David.
2:12 And this is the sign to you; ye shall find a child wrapped, and lying in a manger.'
2:13 And there was suddenly a multitude of (an) host of (the) heaven with the angel praising God, and saying:
2:14 Glory to God in the highest, and peace upon the earth and good pleasure among [the] men.'
2:15 And it came to pass (that), the angels having gone to (the) heaven from them, the shepherds spake to one another, saying: Let us go unto Bethlehem and see concerning this word which came--this which the Lord shewed to us.'
2:16 And they came hasting, they found Mary and Joseph, and the child lying in the manger.
2:17 And having seen, they knew concerning the word which was spoken to them concerning the child.
2:18 And all who heard wondered at the things which the shepherds spake to them.
2:19 But Mary--she was keeping all these words, meditating in her heart.
2:20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God over all things which they heard and the things which they saw, according as was spoken to them.
2:21 And eight days having been completed that they might circumcise him, his name was called Jesus,' which the angel called him from (the time) before he was conceived in (the) womb.
2:22 And the days having been completed for the cleansing according to the law of Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord,
2:23 according as it is written in the law of the Lord: that every male which will open (the) womb of his mother shall be called holy to the Lord;'
2:24 and to give a sacrifice according as was said in (the) law of the Lord: ' A pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.'
2:25 And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, his name being Simon; and this man was righteous, devout, looking for (the) consolation of Israel: and there was (the) Holy Spirit [put] upon him.
2:26 And they were shewing to him in a revealing by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see (the) death, before he saw Christ the Lord.
2:27 And he came in the Spirit up to the temple, and as (lit. in) his parents (were) bringing the child Jesus in, to do for him according to that which was required by the law,
2:28 Simon took him up on his arms, and blessed God, saying:
2:29 Now, my Lord, thou wilt send thy servant away in peace, according to thy word;
2:30 because mine eyes saw thy salvation,
2:31 which thou preparedst before all the peoples:
2:32 a light for revelation to (lit. of) Gentiles, and a glory of thy people Israel.'
2:33 And his father and his mother wondered at the things which are said concerning him.
2:34 And Simon blessed them, and said to Mary (the) mother of the child: 'Lo, this (child) is set for a fall and a rising of many in Israel, and a sign which is opposed.
2:35 And thou thyself--a sword shall pass (through) thy soul, that thoughts may be revealed from many hearts.'
2:36 And (there) was (imperf.) Anna the prophetess, (the) daughter of Phanuel from (the) tribe of Asser--she (lit. this) had grown (old) of many days, she was living with (a) husband seven years from her virginity,
2:37 and she (lit. this) had been a widow unto eighty-four years--who was not passing not away from the temple, in fastings and prayers ministering night and day.
2:38 And at that hour she came before him, she thanked God, and she was speaking concerning him with all who looked for a redemption of Jerusalem.
2:39 And having finished everything according to (the) law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their city Nazareth.
2:40 And the child had grown, and was being strengthened, being full of wisdom, and grace of God was (imperf) upon him.
2:41 And his parents used to go (year) by year to Jerusalem to the feast of the Passover.
2:42 And he having become twelve years old, they went to the feast according to the custom.
2:43 And the days having been finished, as (lit. in) they (were) returning, the child Jesus was left behind them in Jerusalem; and his parents knew not;
2:44 but thinking that he was walking with them who walked on the road, they went on (lit. came) a day of walking. And they were seeking for him among their kinsfolk and them whom they knew.
2:45 And having not found him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking for him.
2:46 And it came to pass after three days (that) they found him in the temple, sitting in (the) midst of the teachers, hearing them and asking them.
2:47 And they who heard him were (imperf.) all amazed at the knowledge and his answering them.
2:48 And having seen him, they wondered: and his mother said to him: 'My son, what is this which thou didst to us thus? behold thy father and I were grieving, seeking for thee.'
2:49 And he said to them; Wherefore seek ye for me? were ye not knowing that I must be in the things of my Father?'
2:50 And they understood not his word which he said to them.
2:51 And he came down with them to Nazareth, and was (imperf.) subject to them: but his mother was keeping all these words in her heart.
2:52 And Jesus was advancing in [the] stature and [the] wisdom, and [the] grace with God and the men.
3:1 Now in (the) fifteenth year of (the) government of Tiberius (the) king, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his brother being tetrarch of Hidurea and the Tetragonites country, and Lisanios being tetrarch of Abiline,
3:2 in the time of Anna and Kaiapha the chief priests, came the (lit. a) word of God upon John (the) son of Zacharias in (the) desert.
3:3 And he came to all the region round about the Jordan preaching baptism of repentance for (the) forgiveness of sin;
3:4 as it was written in (the) book of the words of Esaias the prophet: (The) voice of him who crieth out in (the) desert: Prepare (the) road of the Lord, make straight his paths.
3:5 Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and every hill shall be humiliated, and the (places) which are crooked shall become straight, and the (places) which are hard, smooth roads;
3:6 and all flesh shall see the Saviour of God.'
3:7 He was saying then to the multitudes who came forth to him to be baptised by him: Offspring of the vipers, who told you to flee from the anger which cometh?
3:8 Send fruit then forth worthy of the repentance, and begin not to say in yourselves, that (as) our father we have Abraam. I say to you, that it is possible for God to raise up sons to Abraam from these stones.
3:9 And now the axe is laid at (the) root of the trees, and every tree which will not bring forth good fruit will be cut down, and cast to the fire.'
3:10 And the multitudes were asking him, saying: What shall (lit. will) we do?'
3:11 And he answered them: He who hath two coats let him give to him who hath not; and he who hath victuals let him do likewise' (lit. again thus).
3:12 And there came, again, publicans also that they might be baptised, and they said to him: Teacher, what shall (lit. will) we do?'
3:13 And he said to them: Do not anything beyond that which is appointed to you.'
3:14 And soldiers also were asking him, saying: What shall (lit. will) we also do?' And he said to them: Do not assault any one, nor take anything by violence; and let your wages suffice you.'
3:15 And (as) all the people are (lit. is) looking, and all (are) reasoning in their heart concerning John, lest haply he is Christ;
3:16 John answered them all, saying: I indeed baptise you with water; but the stronger than I cometh, (of) whom I am not worthy to unloose a latchet of his shoe, he shall baptise you with the (lit. a) Holy Spirit and fire:
3:17 whose fan of winnowing (lit. removing) (is) in his hand to cleanse his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner, but he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire.'
3:18 (With) many (things) indeed then, and other (things) encouraging them, he was preaching good tidings to the people;
3:19 but Herod the tetrarch, John reproving him concerning Herodias (the) wife of Philip his brother, and concerning all things which Herod did,
3:20 added this also to them all, he threw John into the prison.
3:21 And it came to pass (that) all the people having been baptised, and Jesus also having been baptised and praying, (the) heaven opened,
3:22 and the Holy Spirit came down upon him in (the) form of a body as a dove, and there was a voice from (the) heaven: 'Thou art my Son, my beloved in whom I was well pleased.'
3:23 And Jesus began to be in (the) thirtieth year, as he is thought (the) son of Joseph, [the] of Eli,
3:24 of Matthewthat, of Levi, of Melchi, of Janne, of Joseph,
3:25 of Matthewthathiu, of Amos, of Naum, of Esrim, of Agge,
3:26 of Maat, of Matthewthathiu, of Semein, of Joseph, of Joda,
3:27 of Jonan, of Resa, of Zorobabel, of Salathiel, of Neri,
3:28 of Melchi, of Addi, of Kosam, of Almadam, of Er,
3:29 of Jesu, of Elezer, of Jorim, of Matthewthat, of Levi,
3:30 of Simeon, of Juda, of Joseph, of Jonam, of Eliakim,
3:31 of Melea, of Menna, of Matthewtatha, of Nathan, of David,
3:32 of Jesse. of Jobed, of Boes, of Salmon, of Nasson,
3:33 of Aminadab, of Admin, of Arni, of Asrom, of Phares, of Juda,
3:34 of Jakob, of Isaak, of Abraam, of Tharra, of Nachor,
3:35 of Saruk, of Ragav, of Phalech, of Eber., of Sala,
3:36 of Kainam, of Arphaxad, of Sem, of Noe, of Lamech,
3:37 of Matthewhysala, of Enoch, of Jard, of Maleleel, of Kainam,
3:38 of Enos, of Seth, of Adam, of God.
4:1 And Jesus being full of the Holy Spirit returned from the Jordan, and the Spirit took him away to (the) desert,
4:2 for forty days the devil tempting him. And he ate not anything in those days: and they having been finished, he hungered.
4:3 And the devil said to him: 'If thou art (the) Son of God, command this stone that it may become bread.'
4:4 And Jesus answered him It is written that the man was not to live by (lit. to) bread alone.'
4:5 And having taken him away aloft, he shewed to him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
4:6 And the devil said to him: 'I will give to thee all this authority, and their glory, because to me it is delivered; and to him whom I wish I give it.
4:7 If thou then shouldest worship before me, all shall be thine.'
4:8 And Jesus answered, he said to him: 'It is written, that the Lord thy God thou shalt worship, and him alone thou shalt serve.'
4:9 And he brought him, again, up to Jerusalem, and made him stand upon (the) wing of the temple, and said to him: If thou art (the) Son of God, throw thyself down from here (lit. this):
4:10 for it is written, that he shall order his angels concerning thee, that they keep thee,
4:11 and lift thee upon their arms, lest haply thou dash thy foot against (a) stone.'
4:12 And Jesus answered, he said to him: It was said, that thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.'
4:13 And the devil having finished all the temptation, went from him for (lit. unto) a time.
4:14 And Jesus returned into Galilee in the power of the Spirit: and a fame came forth in all the region round about concerning him.
4:15 And he was teaching in their synagogues, all glorifying him.
4:16 And he came to Nazareth, the place in which he was brought up: and he went into the synagogue on the day of the sabbaths, according to the custom, and rose to read.
4:17 And having opened the book, he found the place in which it was (imperf.) written:
4:18 The (lit. a) Spirit of the Lord is upon me; therefore he anointed me, he sent me to preach good tidings to the poor, to proclaim to the captives release, and sight to the blind; to send to them who are bound, for (lit. in) release,
4:19 to proclaim the (lit an) acceptable year of the Lord.'
4:20 And having rolled the book, he gave it to the officer, he sat, and all who were in the synagogue--their eyes were looking upon him.
4:21 And he began to say to them: This scripture was fulfilled to-day in your ears.'
4:22 And they were all bearing witness to him, and were wondering at the words of [the] grace, which were coming from his mouth. And they were saying: Is not this (the) son of Joseph?'
4:23 And he said to them: Ye will altogether say this parable to me: "Physician, heal thine own self:" the things which we heard of having been done in Kapharnaum, do here also in thy city.'
4:24 And he said to them: Verily I say to you, that there is not any prophet acceptable in his city.
4:25 And truly I say to you, that there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elias, when (the) heaven was shut for three years and six months, so that there was a great famine upon all (the) earth;
4:26 and Elias was not sent to any of them, except to a widow woman, who was in Sarepta of Sidonia.
4:27 And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Eliseos the prophet: and not any of them were cleansed, except Neman the Syrian.'
4:28 And they were all filled with anger, hearing these (things),
4:29 and they rose, they thrust (lit. threw) him outside of the city, and they brought him forth upon (the) height of the mountain upon which their city was (imperf.) set, so that they might cast him down headlong.
4:30 But he having passed through their midst, was walking (away).
4:31 And he came down to Kapharnaum, a city of Galilee. And he was teaching them on the sabbaths:
4:32 and they were (imperf.) amazed at his teaching; because his word was (imperf.) with authority.
4:33 And there was a man in the synagogue, having (lit. being) an unclean spirit with him, and he cried out (lit. up) with a great cry:
4:34 What (hast) thou with us, Jesus the Nazarene? camest thou to destroy us? I know thee who thou (art), the Holy (one) of God.'
4:35 And Jesus rebuked him, saying: Be silenced, and come out of him.' And the demon having cast him down in (lit. to the) midst, came out of him, he gave not any pain to him.
4:36 And a great fear came upon them all, and they were speaking to one another, saying: What is this word? because with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, they come out.'
4:37 And there was a fame spread abroad concerning him in all places of the region round about.
4:38 And he rose from the synagogue, he went into (the) house of Simon. And (the) mother-in-law of Simon--there was a great fever with her, and they were beseeching him for her.
4:39 And he stood above her, he rebuked the fever, and it left her: and immediately she rose and ministered to them.
4:40 And (the) sun having set, all who have sick folk in sicknesses of many kinds (are) bringing them to him. And he having laid hand on each of them, healed them.
4:41 And demons also were coming out from many, crying out, saying: Thou art (the) Son of God.' And he was rebuking them; he permits them not to speak, because they were knowing him, that he is Christ.
4:42 And the day having come, he came forth, he went to a desert place: and the multitudes were seeking for him, and they came to him, and were laying hold on him, that he should not go from them.
4:43 But he said to them: 'I must preach in the other cities good tidings of the kingdom of God, because therefore was I sent.'
4:44 And he was preaching in the synagogues of Judea.
5:1 And it came to pass, the multitudes having gathered upon him and to hear the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennezareth;
5:2 and he saw two ships moored by the lake: but the fishermen, having come up in them, were washing their nets.
5:3 He betook himself to one of the ships, being Simon's, he told him to move out from the shore a little. And having sat, he was teaching the multitudes from the ship.
5:4 And having ended speaking, he said to Simon: 'Come out to the deep, and let your nets down for a draught.'
5:5 And Simon answered, he said: 'Teacher, all the night we toiled, we caught not, but at (lit. in) thy word we will let the nets down.'
5:6 And having done this, they gathered a great multitude of fish, and the nets were going to rend.
5:7 And they beckoned to their friends, who were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, they filled the two ships, so that they began to sink.
5:8 And Simon Peter having seen, threw himself at (the) feet of Jesus, saying: 'Go from me, my Lord, because I (am) a sinful man.'
5:9 For fear seized him, and all who were with him, at (the) draught of the fish which they caught:
5:10 and likewise (lit. thus again) James also and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were (imperf.) friends to Simon. Jesus said to Simon: Fear not, for henceforth thou shalt be a fisherman catcher of men.'
5:11 And having drawn the nets to the shore, they left everything, they followed' him.
5:12 And it came to pass, that (lit. and) they having come into one of the cities, lo, a man full of leprosy. And having seen Jesus, he threw himself upon his face beseeching him, saying: 'My Lord, if thou shouldest wish, it is possible for thee to cleanse me.'
5:13 And he stretched out his hand, he touched him, saying: 'I wish, be cleansed.' And immediately the leprosy went from him.
5:14 And he ordered him, saying: Tell not any one, but go shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing according as Moses commanded, for a witness to them.'
5:15 But the report (lit. word) concerning him spread abroad the more: and great multitudes gathered to hear him, and (for him) to heal them in their sicknesses.
5:16 And he used to go to the desert places and pray.
5:17 And it came to pass on one of the days, that (lit. and) he was teaching, and Pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting, having come from all Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem: and the (lit. a) power of the Lord was (present) for (the) curing them, is
5:18 And behold, men brought one, paralysed upon a bed: and they were seeking to bring him in, and to lay him before him.
5:19 And having not found the way of bringing him in because of the multitude, they went up on the housetop, they let him down with the bed through the tiling in (the) midst before Jesus.
5:20 And having seen their faith, he said to the paralysed: 'Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.'
5:21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying: 'Who is this who speaketh this blasphemy? For whom is it possible to forgive sin, except the one alone--God?'
5:22 And Jesus having known their reasonings answered, he said to them: Wherefore reason ye in your hearts?
5:23 What is easy to say: Thy sins are forgiven thee," or to say: "Rise and walk?"
5:24 That ye may know that (the) Son of (the) man hath authority upon the earth to forgive sin'--then (lit. and) he said to the paralysed--'to thee I say: "Rise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house."'
5:25 And immediately he rose before them, he took up that upon which he lay (lit. was sleeping), he went to his house, glorifying God.
5:26 And amazement took all, and they were glorifying God, and they were filled with fear, saying: We saw wonders to-day.'
5:27 And after these (things) he came out, and he saw a publican, his name being Levi, sitting at a custom-house, and he said to him: Walk after me.'
5:28 And he left everything, he rose, he walked after him.
5:29 And Levi made a great feast for him within his house: and there was a great multitude of the publicans and others sitting-at-meat with them.
5:30 And the Pharisees and the scribes were murmuring against his disciples, saying: 'Wherefore do ye eat and drink with the publicans and the sinners?'
5:31 And Jesus answered, he said to them: They who are strong have not need of the physician, but they who are diseased.
5:32 For I came not to invite the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.'
5:33 And they said to him: The disciples of John make many fastings and prayers, likewise (lit. thus again) those of the Pharisees, but thy disciples--they eat, they drink.'
5:34 And Jesus said to them: 'Is it possible for you to make (the) sons of the bridegroom fast, while the bridegroom (is) with them?
5:35 But days come when the bridegroom should be taken away from them, then shall they fast in those days.'
5:36 And he was speaking (lit. saying) a parable to them: No one rendeth a piece of cloth from a new garment and putteth (lit. throweth) it to an old garment; otherwise it rendeth the new also, and the piece which was taken away from the new agreeth not with the old.
5:37 Nor doth any one put (lit. throw) new wine into old bottles; otherwise the new wine rendeth the bottles, and it (lit. he) is poured out, and the bottles perish.
5:38 But they put new wine into new bottles.
5:39 And no one drinking old (wine) will wish (for) new: for he saith: "The old is sweet."'
6:1 And it came to pass, (that) he passed on the sabbaths through the cornfields, and his disciples were plucking the ears of corn, rubbing them in their hands and eating them.
6:2 But some of the Pharisees said: Wherefore do ye that which is not right to do on the sabbaths?'
6:3 And Jesus answered, he said to them: Did ye not read even this, that which David did, when he hungered, and they who were with him:
6:4 how he went into (the) house of God, and the loaves of the Prothesis--he took them, he ate them, and he gave to them also who were with him, which it was not lawful for them to eat except (for) the priests alone?'
6:5 And he was saying to them: The Lord of the sabbath is (the) Son of (the) man.'
6:6 And it came to pass on the sabbath also, (that) he went into their synagogue and taught: and there was a man there whose right hand was (lit. is) withered.
6:7 The scribes and the Pharisees were considering him, whether he will heal on (the) sabbath, that they might find accusation against him.
6:8 But he was knowing their reasonings, he said to the man whose hand was (imperf.) withered: `Rise, stand in (the) midst;' and he rose, he stood.
6:9 Jesus said to them: 'I ask you, whether it is lawful to do good on the sabbaths, or to do evil? to save life (lit. a soul), or to destroy it'?
6:10 And having looked upon them all, he said to the man: Stretch out thy hand.' And he stretched it out; and his hand was cured.
6:11 And they were filled with madness; and were speaking to one another what they will do to Jesus.
6:12 And it came to pass in those days, (that) he came forth upon the mountain to pray; and he was keeping watch in [the] prayer to (lit. of) God.
6:13 And the day having come, he called his disciples: and he chose from them twelve, whom he named Apostles;'
6:14 Simon whom they call Peter,' and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
6:15 and Matthew, and Thomas, and James (the son) of Alphaeus, and Simon whom they call the Zealot,'
6:16 and Judas of James, and Judas (the) Iscariot.
6:17 And having come down with them, he stood in a level place, and a multitude of his disciples, and also a great multitude of the people from all Judea, and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast (of) Tyre and Sidon,
6:18 who came to hear him, and that he might cure them from their sicknesses; and them whom the unclean spirits were afflicting he healed.
6:19 And the whole multitude was seeking to touch him; because power was coining out of him, and he was curing them all.
6:20 And he, having lifted up his eyes to his disciples, was saying: Blessed are ye the poor: because yours is the kingdom of God.
6:21 Blessed are ye who are hungry now: because ye will be satisfied. Blessed are ye who weep now: because ye will laugh (lit. mock).
6:22 Blessed are ye, if the men hate you, and separate you, and revile you, and cast out your name as evil because of (the) Son of (the) man.
6:23 Rejoice in that day, and be glad: for lo, your reward is great in (the) heaven, for these (things) their fathers were doing to the prophets.
6:24 But woe to you of the rich: because ye have already received your comfort.
6:25 Woe to you of them who are satisfied now: because ye will hunger. Woe to you of them who laugh (lit. mock) now: because ye will mourn and ye will weep.
6:26 Woe to you, if all the men should say of you "well:" for their fathers were doing these (things) likewise (lit. again thus) to the false prophets.
6:27 But I say to you of them who hear, "Love your enemies, do good to them who hate you.
6:28 Bless them who curse you. Pray for them who persecute you.
6:29 To him who will strike this cheek offer the other: and him who will take away thy garment forbid not to take away thy coat also.
6:30 And give to every one who will ask of thee; and of him who will take away the things which are thine, want them not (again).
6:31 And according as ye wish that the men should do to you, do ye also to them thus.
6:32 And if ye are to love them who love you, what are your thanks (sing.)? for the sinners also loved them who love them.
6:33 And if ye are to do good to them who do good with you, what are your thanks (sing)? the sinners also do thus.
6:34 And if ye should lend to .some, hoping to receive of them, what are your thanks (sing.)? the sinners also themselves lend to sinners, that they may receive of them their exchange.
6:35 But love your enemies, and do good to them, and give, and hope not for anything again; and your reward will be great, and ye will be sons of the Highest: because he is kind to the unthankful and the evil.
6:36 Be ye pitiful, as your Father (is) being pitiful.
6:37 Judge (lit. give judgement) not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn (lit. throw judgement) not, and ye will not be condemned. Forgive, and be forgiven.
6:38 Give, and be given; a good measure full, shaken, running over they will give into your bosom. For with the measure with which ye will measure, it is to be measured to you."
6:39 And he spake (lit. said) also a parable to them: 'Is it possible for a blind man to guide a blind man? will they not both fall into a ditch?
6:40 Is there a disciple greater than his teacher? But let every one, being prepared, be as his teacher.
6:41 Wherefore then seest thou the mote in (the) eye of thy brother, but the beam which is in thine eye thou considerest not?
6:42 Or how is it possible for thee to say to thy brother: "My brother, let me cast the mote from thine eye," and thou thyself seest not the beam which is in thine eye? Hypocrite, cast the beam from thine eye first, and then thou shalt see clearly to cast the mote from (the) eye of thy brother.
6:43 For there is not a good tree producing an evil fruit; again, there is not an evil tree producing a good fruit.
6:44 For each of the trees they know from its fruit. For they gather not figs from thorns, and cut not grapes off' a bramble-bush.
6:45 The good man from the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth the good; and the evil (man) from the treasure, which is evil, bringeth forth that which is evil: from (the) abundance of (the) heart the mouth speaketh.
6:46 And wherefore call ye me "Lord, Lord," and do not the things which I say?
6:47 Every one who will come to me, and hear my words, and do them, I will show you to whom he was likened:
6:48 he was likened to a man building a house, who hewed out, and dug down, and laid a foundation upon the rock: and great rains having come, the river struck in at that house, and it could not move it, because that it was (imperf.) built well.
6:49 But he who will hear my words, and do them not, he was likened to a man who built a house upon the earth without foundation; into which the river struck, and immediately it fell, and (the) fall of that house became great.'
7:1 And having quite finished all his words in (the) ears of the people, he came into Kapharnaum.
7:2 And a centurion's servant (lit. a centurion his servant), who was (imperf.) precious to him, being diseased, was going to die.
7:3 And having heard concerning Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and cure his servant.
7:4 And they, having come to Jesus, besought him earnestly, saying: He is worthy for whom thou wilt do this:
7:5 for he loveth our nation; and himself built for us the synagogue.'
7:6 And Jesus was walking with them. And now he being not far from the house, the centurion sent to him friends, saying to him: Lord, trouble not thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest come in under (the) roof of my house:
7:7 therefore neither thought (lit. made) I myself worthy to come unto thee: but say with (the) word, and my servant (lit. child) will be cured.
7:8 For I also am a man ranked under authority, having (lit. being) soldiers under me: and I say to this (one), "Go," he goeth; and another, "Come," and he cometh; and my servant, "Do this," and he doeth it.'
7:9 And Jesus having heard these (things) wondered at him, and having turned himself, he said: 'I say to you that neither in all Israel found I [not] faith of this degree.'
7:10 And they who were sent, having returned to the house, found the servant cured.
7:11 And it came to pass on the (lit. his) morrow, (that) he went to a city called 'Nain;' and his disciples were walking with him, and a great multitude.
7:12 Now when he approached to the gate of the city, lo, they were taking one away dead, being the (lit. a) only son of his mother, and she (lit. this) was a widow: and there was a great multitude of the city with her.
7:13 And Jesus, having seen her, had compassion upon her, and said to her: Weep not.'
7:14 And he came, he touched the bier: and they who carried stood. And he said: Young man, to thee I say, Rise.'
7:15 And the dead sat, and began to speak. And he gave him to his mother.
7:16 And fear took all: and they were glorifying God, saying that a great prophet rose among us: and, that God visited his people.
7:17 And the report (lit. word) came forth concerning him in all Judea, and all the region round about.
7:18 And his disciples told John concerning all these (things). And having called two of his disciples,
7:19 he sent them to the Lord, saying: (Art) thou he who cometh, or look we for another?
7:20 And the men, having come to him, said: 'John the Baptist sent us to thee, saying: "Art thou he who cometh, or look we for another?"'
7:21 In that hour he healed many from sicknesses and plagues and evil spirits; and to many blind he granted [the] sight.
7:22 And he answered, he said to them: 'Go, tell John the things which ye see, and which ye heard; the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise, the poor have good tidings preached to them.
7:23 And blessed is he, who will not be offended in me.'
7:24 And the messengers of John having gone, he began to say to the multitudes concerning John: 'What came ye out to (the) desert to see? a reed shaken by a wind?
7:25 But what came ye out to see? a man who is clothed with soft raiment (plur.)? Behold, those with the garments of (the) glory and (the) delight are in (the) house of the kings.
7:26 But what came ye out to see? a prophet? Yea, I say to you, more than a prophet.
7:27 This is he concerning whom it is written: "Lo, I will send (the) messenger before thy face, who will prepare thy road in front of thee."
7:28 I say to you, that among (the) offspring of [the] women there is not any greater than John: but the lesser than he in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he.'
7:29 And all the people and the publicans justified God, having been baptised with the baptism of John.
7:30 But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God in themselves. they were not baptised by him.
7:31 To what am I to liken myself for the men of this generation, and to what are they like?
7:32 They are like to children who sit in a marketplace, and calling to one another, saying: "We sang to you, and ye danced not: we mourned, and ye wept not."
7:33 For John the Baptist came eating not bread, and he drinketh not wine, and ye say, that there is a demon with him.
7:34 And (the) Son of (the) man came eating and drinking; and ye say: "Behold, a man gluttonous and winebibber, being friend to the publicans and the sinners!"
7:35 And [the] wisdom was justified from all her sons.'
7:36 One of the Pharisees was beseeching him that he would eat with him. And having entered (the) house of the Pharisee, he sat down to meat.
7:37 And behold, a woman--she was (imperf.) (a) sinner in the city; and having known that he sits at meat in (the) house of the Pharisee, she took an alabaster-box of ointment,
7:38 and having stood behind at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head, and was kissing his feet, anointing them with the ointment.
7:39 And the Pharisee who invited him, having seen, said in himself, saying: If this (man) were a prophet, he would have known what [is] and of what sort is this woman who touched him, that she is a sinner.'
7:40 And Jesus answered, he said to him: Simon, I have a word to say to thee.' And he said: Teacher, say it.'
7:41 And he said: There were two debtors having one (lit. a) creditor. The one owed five hundred staters, and the other owed fifty.
7:42 And they had not (enough) to pay; he forgave them both frankly. Which then of them will love him the more?'
7:43 Simon answered, he said: I think, he to whom he forgave frankly the most.' And he said: 'Thou judgedst rightly.'
7:44 And having turned to the woman, he said to Simon: Thou seest this woman. I came into thy house. thou gavest not water for my feet: but this (one), she wetted my feet with her tears, and wiped them with her hairs.
7:45 Thou kissedst not my mouth: but this (one), she, from (the time) I came in, ceased not to kiss my feet.
7:46 Thou anointedst not my head with oil: but this (one), she anointed my feet with ointment.
7:47 Therefore I say to thee, that her sins which are great are forgiven her, because she loved greatly. For to whom they forgive little, he loveth little.'
7:48 And he said to her: Thy sins are forgiven thee.'
7:49 And they who sat at meat began to say in themselves: Who is this who gives (lit. makes) (the) forgiveness of sin also?'
7:50 And he said to the woman: 'Go in peace, thy faith saved thee.'
8:1 And it came to pass after these things, that (lit. and) he was walking by city and village, proclaiming and preaching good tidings of the kingdom of God, and the twelve being with him,
8:2 and women also whom he healed from evil spirits and sicknesses, Mary who is called The Magdalene,' from whom he cast the seven demons,
8:3 and Joanna (the) wife of Chuza the steward of Herod, and Susanna, and many others, who were ministering to him from their possessions.
8:4 And a great multitude being assembled, with them who were coming to him (from) every city, he spake (lit. said) by a parable.
8:5 The sower came forth to sow his seed: and in his sowing, some (lit. one) indeed fell by the road; and it was crushed,  and the birds of (the) heaven ate it.
8:6 And another fell upon a rock, and grew up, it withered, because that it had not moisture.
8:7 And another fell in (the) midst of the thorns; and the thorns, having grown up with it, choked it.
8:8 And other fell upon the good earth, and having grown up, brought forth fruit an hundredfold.' Having said (lit. saying) these (things), he was calling: 'Who path an ear to hear, let him hear.'
8:9 And his disciples were asking him: What is this parable?'
8:10 And he said to them: To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but (to the) rest in parables; that seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not hear, and may not understand.
8:11 Now the parable is this. The seed is the word of God.
8:12 And they who are by the road are they who hear: then the devil cometh, and taketh away the word from their heart, that they may not believe and be saved.
8:13 And they who are upon the rock are they (who), when they should hear, receive the word to them with joy; and these have not root, who believe for a time, and in (the) time of temptation they cease.
8:14 And that which fell in the thorns, these are they who hear, and the cares and the riches and the pleasures of this life, in which they walk (lit. walking in them), choke them, and they bring not forth fruit.
8:15 And that which fell in the good ground, these are they who having heard the word in an honest and good heart (are) laying hold on it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
8:16 No one lighteth a lamp and covereth it with a vessel or setteth it underneath a bed; but setteth it upon a lampstand, that they who will come in may see the light.
8:17 For there is not that which is hidden, that it will not appear; neither is there that which is secret, that it will not be known, and come into (the) midst.
8:18 Take heed then in what manner ye heard: for to him who hath shall be given; and from him who hath not, even that (lit. the one also) which he thinketh that he hath shall be taken away.
8:19 His mother came to him, and his brothers, and they were not able to meet with him because of the multitude.
8:20 And they told him: 'Lo, thy mother and thy brothers stand outside, wishing to see thee.'
8:21 But he answered, he said to them: My mother and my brothers are these, who hear the word of God, and who do it.'
8:22 And it came to pass on one of the days, (that) he entered into a ship, himself and his disciples, and he said to them: Let us go across the lake.' And they launched (lit. drew) forth.
8:23 But (as they are) sailing, he (is) sleeping: and a great wind came down to the lake, and it was overwhelming them, and they were (imperf.) in danger.
8:24 And having come, they woke him, saying: Teacher, we shall (lit. will) perish.' And he having risen, rebuked the wind and the waves of the waters, and they ceased, and there was a great calm.
8:25 And he said to them: Where was your faith?' But they having feared wondered, saying to one another: Who then is this? because he commandeth even the winds and the waters, and they obey him.'
8:26 And they sailed to (the) country of the Gergesenes, which is over against Galilee.
8:27 And he having come forth on (lit. to) the land, a man came forth to him from the city, having (lit. being) demons with him. And having been (so) a long time, he clothed himself not with a garment, and abode not in a house, but in the sepulchres.
8:28 And having seen Jesus, he cried out, he threw himself down at his feet, and said with a loud voice: 'What (hast) thou with me, Son of God, who liveth? I beseech thee, pain me not.'
8:29 For he had ordered the unclean spirit to come from the man. For it had carried him off many times, and they used to bind him with chains and fetters, keeping him; and he used to burst the bonds, and the demon used to lead him to the deserts.
8:30 And Jesus asked him: What is thy name?' And he said: Legion; ' because many devils went into him.
8:31 And they were beseeching him that he would not command them to go to (the) abyss.
8:32 Now there was there a herd of swine feeding in the mountain: and they were beseeching him that he would permit them to enter those (swine). And he permitted them.
8:33 And the demons having come from the man, went into the swine: and the herd of swine came down to the lake by (lit. in) the precipice, and were choked.
8:34 And they who fed (them), having seen what was done, fled, and told them who were in the city, and them who were in (the) field
8:35 They came forth to see what was done; and they came to Jesus, and they found the man, sitting, out of whom the devils came, sane, clothed with his garments, set at (the) feet of Jesus; and they feared.
8:36 And they who saw (it) told them in what manner he, with whom were (imperf.) the demons, was saved.
8:37 And all the multitude of the region round about of the Gergesenes besought him that he would go from them; because it (was) a great fear which they were (imperf.) And he entered into (the) ship, he returned.
8:38 The man out of whom the demons came, was beseeching him, that he might stay with him: but he sent him (away), saying to him:
8:39 Return to thy house, and speak the things which God did with thee.' And he went out in all the city, proclaiming the things which God did for him.
8:40 And Jesus having returned, the multitude received him to them (lit. him); for they were all looking for him.
8:41 And lo, a man came, his name being Jairus, and this (one) was a ruler of the synagogue: and having thrown himself down at (the) feet of Jesus, he was beseeching him to come into his house;
8:42 because he had an only daughter, being [in] twelve years (old), and she (lit. this) was going to die. And Jesus being about to come, the multitudes were thronging him.
8:43 And a woman having had an issue of blood for twelve years, who (lit. this who) spent all her living on the physicians, and could not be healed by any,
8:44 having come forth behind, touched (the) hem of his garment: and the issue of blood stanched.
8:45 And Jesus said: Who touched me?' And all denying, Peter and they who were with him said: Teacher, the multitudes surround thee and throng thee.'
8:46 But Jesus said: Some one touched me: for I knew that power came (lit. a power, it came) out of me.'
8:47 And the woman. having seen that he forgot not, came trembling, and having thrown herself down before him, confessed before all the people, for what reason she touched him, and the manner in which she was cured immediately.
8:48 He said to her: 'My daughter, thy faith saved thee; go in peace.'
8:49 (As he is) yet speaking, one from the ruler-of-the-synagogue came, saying: Thy daughter died, trouble not the teacher.'
8:50 But Jesus having heard, answered, he said: Fear not; only believe, and she will be saved.'
8:51 And having come to the house, he permitted not any to come in with him except Peter, and James, and John, and (the) father of the child and her mother.
8:52 And all were weeping and wailing for her: but he said: Weep not; for the child died not, but she slept.'
8:53 And they were mocking him, knowing that she died.
8:54 But he having put (lit, thrown) them all (forth), and having laid hold on her hand, called, saying: Child, rise.'
8:55 And her spirit returned to her, and immediately she rose: and he commanded that they should give to her to eat.
8:56 And her parents were amazed: but he ordered them not to say that which was done, to any one.
9:1 And having called the twelve apostles, he gave to them power and authority over all the demons and the sicknesses.
9:2 And he sent them to proclaim the kingdom of God, and to cure them who were sick.
9:3 And he said to them: 'Take not away anything for (the) road, neither staff, nor scrip, nor bread, nor silver, neither have two coats.
9:4 And the house into which ye will go, abide there, until ye come from there.
9:5 And they who will not receive you to them, (as ye are) coming from that city, shake off (the) dust of your feet for a witness to them.'
9:6 And coming forth, they passed through every village, preaching good tidings, and healing in all places.
9:7 Hered the tetrarch heard all things which were happening, and he was (imperl) doubtful, because that some were saying, that John rose from the dead;
9:8 and others, that Elias manifestest himself; and others, that a prophet of the old (prophets) rose.
9:9 Herod said: John I beheaded: but who is this, concerning whom I hear these (things) of this kind?' And he was seeking to see him.
9:10 And the apostles, having returned, spoke before him the things which they did. And he took them away with him, he went apart alone into a city called Bethsaida.'
9:11 But those multitudes were walking after him: and having received them to him, he was speaking to them concerning the kingdom of God, and them who had need of healing he was curing.
9:12 And the day was beginning to decline. And the twelve, having come to him, said to him: Send the multitudes away, that they may go to the villages which are around, and the fields, that they may rest themselves, and find that which they will eat: because we are here in a desert place.'
9:13 And he said to them: 'Give ye to them to eat.' And they said: There are not more than five loaves with us and two fishes; except we go and buy victuals for all this people.'
9:14 And they were (imperf.) about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples: Let them sit down to meat by companies (lit. place) of fifty to (the) company.'
9:15 And they did thus, he made them all sit down to meat.
9:16 And having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, having gazed up to (the) heaven, he blessed them, and brake them, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.
9:17 And they ate and were all satisfied: and they took up that, which remained over to them, twelve baskets of fragments filled.
9:18 And it came to pass (that) he being apart alone, praying, the disciples were (imperf.) with him; and he asked them, saying: Whom said [the] men that I (am)? '
9:19 And they answered, they said: John the Baptist; but others, "Elias;" and others, that a prophet of the old (prophets) rose.'
9:20 And he said to them: But whom said ye that I (am)?' And Peter answered, he said: Thou art Christ God.'
9:21 But he having charged them, ordered (them) not to say this to any one;
9:22 having said, that (the) Son of (the) man must suffer much; and the elders and chief priests and the scribes (must) reject him, and kill him, and he (must) rise on the third day.
9:23 And he was saying to all: 'He who will wish to follow me, let him deny himself, and let him take up his cross daily, and walk after me.
9:24 For he who wisheth to save his life (lit. soul thus again) will destroy it; and he who will destroy his life because of me, shall save it.
9:25 For what will the man gain, if he should gain the whole world, and destroy his own self or forfeit himself?
9:26 For he who will be ashamed of me and my words, of this (one) also (the) Son of (the) man will be ashamed, if he should come in his glory, and that of his Father, and his holy angels.
9:27 I say to you truly, that there are some among them who stand here, who will not taste of (the) death, until they see the kingdom of God.'
9:28 And it came to pass after these words about eight days, (that) he took away Peter and James and John; he went upon the mountain to pray.
9:29 And it came to pass in his praying, (that the) form of his face was changed, and his vesture was white and (lit. as) flashing.
9:30 And behold, two men were speaking to him, who are Moses and Elias;
9:31 who manifested themselves in glory; they were speaking of his exodus, which he was to fulfil in Jerusalem.
9:32 And Peter and they who were with him had been heavy with slumber: but having kept watch, they saw his glory, and the two men who were standing with him.
9:33 And it came to pass, (that) they being about to part from him, Peter said to Jesus: Teacher, it is good for us that we be here; and--if thou wishest--that we make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias;' he knoweth not that which he said.
9:34 And (as he is) saying these (things), there was a cloud, and it shadowed over them: and they feared, having gone into the cloud.
9:35 And there was a voice out of the cloud, saying: This is my Son, who is chosen, hearken to him.'
9:36 And the voice having been (heard), Jesus alone was found. And they held their peace, and told not to any one in those days any of the things which they saw.
9:37 And it came to pass on the (lit. his) morrow, (that) they having come down from the mountain, a great multitude came forth to him.
9:38 And behold, a man from the multitude cried out: Teacher, I beseech thee look upon my son: because he is an only son to me:
9:39 and lo, spirit cometh upon him, and suddenly he crieth out, and he convulseth him, and he hurleth him down, and his mouth foameth, and it hardly goeth from him, bruising him.
9:40 And I besought thy disciples that they would cast it out; and they could not.'
9:41 Jesus answered, and said: O [the] faithless generation and which is perverse, how long shall (lit. will) I be with you, and bear with you? bring thy son to me hither.'
9:42 (As he is) yet coming in to him, the demon hurled him down, and convulsed him. But Jesus rebuked the unclean demon, and cured the child, and gave him to his father.
9:43 They all were wondering at the greatness of God. But (as) all (are) wondering at all things which he was doing, He said to his disciples:
9:44 Set ye these words in your ears: for (the) Son of (the) man will be given into (the) hands of men.'
9:45 But they understood not (lit. were forgetting) this word, and it was (imperf.) hidden from them, [and] that they might not understand it; they were fearing to ask him concerning this word.
9:46 And a reasoning came into them, as to which of them is the great.
9:47 And Jesus, having seen the reasoning of their heart, took hold of a child, he made him stand by him,
9:48 and said to them: He who will receive this child to him in my name, he received me: and he who receiveth me received him who sent me: for he who is little among you all, this is the great.'
9:49 And John answered: 'Teacher, we saw one casting demons out in thy name, and we forbade him, because he walketh not with us.'
9:50 But Jesus said: Forbid not: for he is not against you: for he who is not against you is for (lit. on) you.'
9:51 And it came to pass, (that) the days of his being received up having been fulfilled, [and] he set steadfastly his face to go to Jerusalem,
9:52 and he sent messengers forth before him: and having gone, they came into a village of the Samaritans, so as to prepare for him.
9:53 And they received him not to them, because his face was (imperf.) directed towards Jerusalem.
9:54 And his disciples James and John having seen (it), said: Lord, wishest thou that we say (the word), and that fire come from (the) heaven, and burn them, as Elias worked.'
9:55 But having turned himself, he rebuked them, saying: Ye know not (of) what spirit ye are; and (that the) Son of (the) man cometh not to destroy the lives of [the] men, but to make live.'
9:56 And they went to another village.
9:57 And (as they are) walking on the road, one said to him: 'Let me walk after thee whither thou goest.'
9:58 Jesus said to him: The foxes have holes, and the birds of (the) heaven have nests; but (the) Son of (the) man hath not where to put his head.'
9:59 And he said to another: Walk after me.' But he said: My Lord, command me first, that I go and bury my father.'
9:60 He said to him: 'Leave the dead, let them embalm their dead; but go thou proclaim the kingdom of God.
9:61 And another said to him: 'I will walk after thee, Lord; command me first, that I take leave of them who are in my house.'
9:62 But Jesus said to him: 'No one having put (lit. thrown) his hand to a plough, and looked back, will be right for (lit, in) the kingdom of God.'
10:1 And after these (things) the Lord appointed (lit. manifested) seventy others, and he sent them forth two (and) two before him into every city and all places, to which he was to go.
10:2 He was saying to them: 'The harvest indeed is great, but the labourers are few: pray then the Lord of the harvest, that he would send (lit. throw, of. Matthew 12:20) forth labourers to his harvest.
10:3 Go: lo, I send you as lambs in (the) midst of wolves.
10:4 Carry not purse, nor scrip, nor shoe: and salute not any one on (the) road.
10:5 And the house which ye go into,--say first: "(The) peace (be) to this house."
10:6 And if (the) son of the peace is there, your peace shall rest [itself] upon it: if not, your peace shall return to you.
10:7 And abide in that house, eating and drinking the things which they have: for the labourer is worthy of his food. Remove not from house to house.
10:8 And the city which ye will go into, and they receive you to them, eat the things which they will set before you:
10:9 and heal them who are sick in it, and say to them, that the kingdom of God approached.
10:10 But the city which ye will go into, and they receive "you not to them, come forth in its streets, say:
10:11 Even the dust, which clave to our feet from your city, we will shake off against (lit. for) you: but know this, that the kingdom of God approached."
10:12 I say to you, that there is to be rest for Sodom in that day, (rather) than (for) that city.
10:13 Woe to thee, Chorazin! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! for in Tyre and Sidon if (there had) been done these mighty works, which were done in you, long ago they (would have) repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
10:14 But Tyre and Sidon,--there is to be rest for them in the judgement, rather than (for) you.
10:15 And thou also Kapharnaum, wilt thou be exalted up to (the) heaven? thou wilt be humiliated down to Amenti.
10:16 He who hearkeneth to you hearkened to me: and he who rejecteth you rejected me; he who rejecteth me rejected him who sent me.'
10:17 And the seventy returned with joy, saying: `Lord, even the demons are subject to us in thy name.'
10:18 And he said to them: 'I saw Satan fall (lit. who fell) from (the) heaven as lightning.
10:19 Lo, I gave to you the authority to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy; and ye (lit. he) shall not suffer (lit. treat you with) any violence.
10:20 But rejoice not in this, that the spirits are subject to you; but rejoice [(in) that], that your names are written in the heavens.'
10:21 And in that hour he was glad in the Holy Spirit, and he said: I confess to thee, Father, Lord of (the) heaven and the earth, because thou hiddest these (things) from (lit. to) wise and understanding, and revealedst them to little children: yea, Father, because this is [as] the good pleasure which was before thee.
10:22 All things were given to me by my Father: and no one knoweth who is (the) Son, except the Father; and who is the Father, except (the) Son, and he to whom (the) Son wisheth to reveal him.'
10:23 And having turned himself to his disciples apart alone, he said: 'Blessed are the eyes which see the things which ye see:
10:24 for I say to you, that many prophets and kings wished to see the things which ye see, and they saw them not; and to hear the things which ye hear, and they heard them not.'
10:25 And behold, a lawyer rose, he tempted him, saying: Teacher, what shall (lit. will) I do that I may inherit eternal life?'
10:26 And he said to him: What is written in the law? or in what manner didst thou read?'
10:27 And he answered, he said: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God from all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy power, and in all thy thought; and thy neighbour (lit. friend) as thyself.
10:28 'And he said to him: 'Thou answeredst rightly: this do, and thou wilt live.'
10:29 But he wishing to he justified, said to Jesus: Who also is my neighbour (lit. friend)?'
10:30 And Jesus answered, he said: There was a man coming down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he came among robbers; and having stripped him, they gave wounds to him, they went (away), they left him being half dead.
10:31 And by chance a priest was coming down by that road: and having seen him, he passed him, he left him.
10:32 Also a Levite having come upon the place, and having seen him, left him, he passed him.
10:33 But a Samaritan walked, he came up to him, and having seen him, had compassion;
10:34 and having come, he bound his wounds, he poured (lit. gave) oil and wine along them; having placed him on his own beast, he brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
10:35 And on the (lit. his) morrow he brought forth two denars, he gave them to the host, and said: "Take care of him with these; and the more which thou wilt spend for him, I, if I should return, will pay (lit. give to) thee."
10:36 Which then of these three, thinkest thou, that he was neighbour (lit. friend) to him who came among the robbers?'
10:37 And he said: He who shewed (lit. did) the pity to (lit. with) him.' And Jesus said to him: Go, do thou also thus.'
10:38 And (as they are) walking, he went into a village: a woman, her name being Martha, received him to her into her house.
10:39 And she (lit. this) had a sister called Mary.' And having sat at (the) feet of the Lord, she was hearing his word.
10:40 But Martha was (imperf.) anxious about much ministering. Having stood, she said: Lord, carest thou not, that my sister left me alone to minister? Bid her then that she help me.'
10:41 Jesus answered, he said to her: Martha, Martha, thou takest care, and thou art troubled concerning many things:
10:42 but (of) few things is the need, or (of) one: for Mary chose for herself the good part, which will not be taken away from her.'
11:1 And it came to pass, (that) he being in a place, praying, having ceased, one of his disciples said to him: 'Lord, teach us to pray, according as John taught his disciples.'
11:2 And he said to them: When ye should pray, say: Our Father who art in the heavens, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in (the) heaven, so upon the earth.
11:3 Give to us daily our bread which cometh.
11:4 And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves forgive our debtors. And bring us not into temptation.'
11:5 And he said to them: 'Which of you hath a friend, and he go unto him at midnight, and say to him: "My friend, lend to me three loaves;
11:6 because a friend of mine came unto me from (the) road, and there is not that which I shall (lit. will) set before him;"
11:7 and he also who is inside answers and says: "Trouble me not; for I have shut my door, and my children are with me upon my bed (lit. place of sleep); it is not possible for me to rise and give to thee."
11:8 I say to you, that even if he should not rise to give to him, because he is his friend, but because of his importunity he shall rise and give to him the things of which he had need.
11:9 I also say to you: "Ask, and it will be given to you. Seek, and ye will find. Knock, and it will be opened to you."
11:10 For every one who asketh receiveth; and he who seeketh findeth; and to him who knocketh, they open.
11:11 And what father who is among you, whose son will ask him for a loaf, will he give a stone to him? Or he ask him for a fish, will he instead of a fish give a serpent to him?
11:12 Or he ask an egg, will he give a scorpion to him?
11:13 If then ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your sons, how much rather will the Father give the (lit. a) Holy Spirit in (the) heaven to them who ask him?'
11:14 And he was casting out a deaf demon. And it came to pass (that), the demon having come out, the deaf spake; and the multitudes wondered.
11:15 But some of them said: By(lit. in) Belzebul (the) ruler of the demons he cast out the demons.'
11:16 And others, tempting, were seeking for a sign from him out of (the) heaven.
11:17 But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom if it should be divided against itself is desolated; and a house against a house falleth.
11:18 And if Satan also was divided against himself, how then will his kingdom be able to stand? because ye say, that by (lit. in) Belzebul I cast out the demons.
11:19 And if I by (lit. in) Belzebul cast out the demons, by (lit. in) whom did your sons cast out? therefore they are judges to you.
11:20 But if I by (lit. in) the (lit. a) finger of God cast out the demons, then the kingdom of God reached you.
11:21 For if the strong man should arm himself and keep his court, his possessions are in peace:
11:22 but if a stronger than he come upon him, and conquer him, he taketh away his armour to which he was trusting, and he scattereth his spoils.
11:23 He who is not with me was against me; and he who gathereth not with me scattereth me away.
11:24 If the unclean spirit should come from the man, he passeth through dry places seeking for a resting-place; and if he should not find, then he said: "I shall (lit. will) return to my house from which I came."
11:25 And if he should come and find it empty, swept, garnished;
11:26 then he goeth and findeth seven other spirits more evil than himself, and if they should go in, they dwell there, and the last (states) of that man are worse than his first.'
11:27 And it came to pass (that as he is) saying these (things), a woman lifted up a voice from the multitude, she said to him: Blessed is the womb which bare (lit. lifted) thee, and the breasts which nourished thee.'
11:28 But he said to her: Yea rather, blessed are they who hear the word of God, and who keep it.'
11:29 And the multitudes being about to assemble, he began to say: This generation is an evil generation, seeking for a sign; and a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of Jona the prophet.
11:30 For according as Jona was a sign to the Ninevites, thus also (the) Son of (the) man will be to this generation.
11:31 The queen of the south shall rise in the judgement with the men of this generation, and shall judge them: because she came from the ends of (the) earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and lo, greater than Solomon (is) here.
11:32 The men of Nineve will rise in the judgement with this generation, and will judge it: because they repented at the preaching of Jona, and lo, greater than Jona (is) here.
11:33 No one lighteth a lamp and setteth it in a secret place, nor under a measurer, but upon the lampstand, that they who go in may see the light.
11:34 (The) lamp of thy body is thine eye: if thine eye is single, all thy body shall give light; but if (it) is evil, all thy body is dark.
11:35 Take heed lest the light which is in thee is darkness.
11:36 If then all thy body is light, having no part dark, all shall be shining, as the lamp with the flashing shall give light.'
11:37 And he having spoken, a Pharisee besought him that would eat with him: and having entered, he sat down to meat.
11:38 And the Pharisee having seen, wondered that he washed not first before the eating.
11:39 And Jesus said to him: Now ye of the Pharisees cleanse outside of the cup and the dish; but inside of you (is) full of extortion and wickedness.
11:40 Senseless (men), did not he, who made outside, also make inside?
11:41 But the things which ye have (lit. which are) give for (the) alms; and lo, all things are cleansed to you.
11:42 But woe to you, Pharisees! because ye give (the) tenth of the mint and the rue and every herb, and ye leave (out) [the] judgement and the love of God: but these it was (imperf.) right that ye should do, and the others that ye should not have left (out).
11:43 Woe to you, Pharisees! because ye love the first sittings in the synagogues, and the salutations in the market-places.
11:44 Woe to you! because ye are as the sepulchres which appear not, and the men who walk upon them know not.'
11:45 And one of the lawyers answered, he said to him: Teacher, saying these (things) thou reproachest us also.'
11:46 And he said: Ye also of the lawyers, woe to you! because ye place burdens painful to be borne upon [the] men, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
11:47 Woe to you! because ye build the sepulchres of the prophets; your fathers killed them.
11:48 Then ye bear witness and agree to the works of your fathers: because they indeed killed them, ye build.
11:49 Therefore also the wisdom of God said: "I shall (lit. will) send to them prophets and apostles, and they shall kill (some) of them, and they shall persecute them;"
11:50 that (the) blood of the prophets, which was shed from (the) foundation of the world, may be avenged on this generation;
11:51 from (the) blood of Abel unto (the) blood of Zacharias (the) son of Barachias, whom they destroyed between the altar and the House: yea, I say to you, that it will all be sought for from this generation.
11:52 Woe to you, Lawyers! because ye took away the keys of (the) knowledge: ye came not in yourselves, and them who are coining in ye hindered.'
11:53 And he having come from there, the scribes and the Pharisees began to watch (him) maliciously, and to speak to him concerning many things:
11:54 using subtlety to ensnare him with a word from his mouth.
12:1 In the mean time myriads of multitude having assembled, so that they trode upon one another, he began to say to his disciples first: Beware of (the) leaven of the Pharisees, which is their hypocrisy.
12:2 There is not anything covered, (so) that it will not be revealed; and there is not that which is hidden, (so) that it will not be known.
12:3 For the things which ye will say in (the) darkness will be heard in (the) light; and that which ye spake in (the) ear in the chambers shall be preached upon the housetops.
12:4 And I say to you my friends: "Fear not them who will kill your body, and after these (things) they have not anything more to do."
12:5 But I shall (lit. will) tell you whom (ye shall) fear (imperative). Fear him who after his killing hath authority to cast to the Geenna; yea, I say to you: "Fear this (one)."
12:6 Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings? and one of them is not forgotten before God.
12:7 But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not: ye are better than many sparrows.
12:8 And I say to you, that every one who will confess me before [the] men, (the) Son of (the) man also will confess him before the angels of God:
12:9 but he who will deny me before [the men] will be denied also before the angels of God.
12:10 And every one who will say a word at (the) Son of (the) man, it will be forgiven him: but he who will blaspheme the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him.
12:11 When they should bring you into the synagogues, and (before) the rulers, and the authorities, take no care how or what ye will answer, or what ye will say.
12:12 For the Holy Spirit will teach you in that hour the things which it will be right to say.'
12:13 And one said to him from the multitude: 'Teacher, bid my brother divide with me the inheritance.'
12:14 But he said: Man, who set me for judge or for divider over you?'
12:15 And he said to them: Take heed, and keep yourselves from all taking by violence: because (the) life was not consisting for the man out of (the) abundance of that which he hath.'
12:16 And he spake (lit. said) a parable to them, saying: There was a rich man whose country was fertile:"
12:17 and he was reasoning in himself, saying: "What shall (lit. will) I do, because I have not place to which to gather my fruits?"
12:18 And he said: "This I will do: I will overthrow my barns, and I will build them greater, and I gather thither all my wheat and my goods.
12:19 And I will say to my soul: My soul, there are many goods laid up for thee for many years; rest thyself, eat, drink, delight thyself.'"
12:20 But God said to him: "Senseless (man), in this night they will take away thy soul from thee; the things which thou gatheredst, whose will they be?"
12:21 This is as he who layeth up (lit. throweth in) for himself, and is not rich toward (lit. in) God.'
12:22 And he said to his disciples: "Therefore I say to you: "Do not take care about your life (lit. soul), viz. what will ye eat; nor about your body, viz. with what will ye clothe yourselves.
12:23 For the life (lit. soul) is better than the food, and the body than the raiment.
12:24 Consider the ravens, that they sow not and reap not; which have not storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them: how much better are ye than the birds
12:25 For which of you, taking care, is it possible to add (lit. place upon) a cubit to his stature?
12:26 If then it is not possible for you (to do) a little, wherefore take ye care about (the) rest?
12:27 Consider the flowers, how they grow, they toil not, nor spin; yet I say to you, that even Solomon in all his glory clothed himself not as one of these.
12:28 But if thus God robeth the grass, (which) is to-day in (the) field, and to-morrow they cast it to the oven, how much rather (shall he clothe you, ye) of [the] little faith?
12:29 And seek not ye also what ye will eat, and what ye will drink, and take not care.
12:30 For all these (things) the Gentiles of the world seek for: your Father knoweth that ye have need of these (things).
12:31 But seek for his kingdom, and all (these) things will be added to you.
12:32 Fear not, little flock, because your Father was well pleased to give to you the kingdom.
12:33 Sell your possessions, give them for alms; make for you purses (which) become not old, an unfailing treasure in the heavens, the place to which thieves approach not, nor moth destroyeth.
12:34 For the place in which your treasure (is), your heart shall be there.
12:35 Let your loins be girt, and your lamps kindled;
12:36 and ye also like to men looking for their Lord, when he will return (lit. unloose) from the marriage feast; that if he should come and knock, they may immediately open to him.
12:37 Blessed are those servants, [who] if their Lord should come, and find them watching: verily I say to you, that he will gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and stand and minister to them.
12:38 And if he should come in the second, and if he should come in the third watch, and find them watching thus, blessed are those (servants).
12:39 But know this, that (if) the owner-ofthe-house knew (inaperf.) in what hour the thief cometh, he would have watched, and would not have permitted them to break through his house.
12:40 And be ye also prepared: because in the hour which ye know not (the) Son of (the) man cometh."'
12:41 And Peter said: Lord, saidst thou this parable to us, or saidst thou it to all?'
12:42 And the Lord said: Who then is the faithful steward and wise, whom his Lord will set over his servants, that he may give to them their food in (the) time of giving it?
12:43 Blessed is that servant, [who] if his Lord should come and find him doing thus.
12:44 Truly I say to you, that he will set him over all his possessions.
12:45 But if that servant should say in his heart: "My Lord will delay; he cometh not yet;" and begin to strike (lit. throw) the servants and the women servants, and eat and drink, and be drunken;
12:46 the Lord of that servant will come in the day (in) which he expecteth him not, and in the hour which he knoweth not, and he will cut him asunder, and will set his part with the unbelievers.
12:47 And that servant, who knew (the) wish of his Lord, and who prepared not, and did not according to his wish, will be given many stripes;
12:48 but he who knew not, and did the things which are worthy of stripes, will be given few stripes. From every one to whom they gave much, they will seek for much and of him to whom they committed much, they will ask the more.
12:49 I came to cast fire upon the earth; and what shall (lit. will) I wish, (rather) than (that) it was already kindled?
12:50 But I have a baptism to be baptised (with); and how am I straitened until it is finished!
12:51 Thought ye that I came to send (lit. cast) peace upon the earth? Nay, I say to you; but division.
12:52 For henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
12:53 They shall be divided, a father against a son, and a son against a father; a mother against a daughter, and a daughter against her mother; a mother-in-law against a daughter-in-law, and a daughter-in-law against a mother-in-law.'
12:54 And he was saying to the multitudes also: When ye should see a cloud having come from the west, ye say immediately: "rain cometh;" and it happeneth thus.
12:55 And when a south wind (is) blowing, ye say: "Scorching heat will happen."
12:56 Hypocrites, ye know how to prove (the) face of (the) heaven and the earth, but how know ye not how to prove this time?
12:57 Wherefore judge ye not the right by your selves alone?
12:58 For as thou wilt go with thine adversary unto a ruler, give diligence to be quit of him on the road; lest haply he draw thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the exactor, and the exactor cast thee to the prison.
12:59 I say to thee, that thou shalt not come from there, until thou payest the last mite.'
13:1 There had come to him at that time some telling him concerning the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices.
13:2 And he answered, he said to them: Thought ye that these Galileans were sinners beyond all the Galileans, because they received these pains?
13:3 Nay, I say to you: but if ye should not repent, ye will all perish thus.
13:4 Or the eighteen men, upon whom the tower fell in the Siloam, and killed them, thought ye that these were debtors beyond all men who dwelt in Jerusalem?
13:5 Nay, I say to you: but if ye should not repent, ye will all perish thus.'
13:6 And he was speaking (lit. saying) this parable to them: (A certain) one had a fig-tree planted in his vineyard; and he came, he sought for fruit on it, he found not.
13:7 And he said to the vinedresser: "Lo, for (lit. from) three years I come (lit. coming) seeking for fruit in this fig-tree, and I find not: cut it down then; why maketh it also useless any longer the earth?
13:8 And he answered, he said to him: "My Lord, leave it this year also, until I dig under it, and dung it:
13:9 perhaps it may bring forth fruit in the year also which cometh: but if it should not bring (forth), thou shalt cut it down." '
13:10 And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on (the) sabbath.
13:11 And behold, a woman having (lit. being set) a spirit of sickness with her for eighteen years; and she was (imperf.) bent, unable to straighten herself at all.
13:12 And Jesus having seen her, called her, and said to her: Woman, thou art unloosed (lit. set) from thy sickness.'
13:13 And he laid his hands upon her: and she was straightened immediately, and glorified God.
13:14 And the ruler of the synagogue answered, being angry because Jesus healed her on (the) sabbath, he was saying to the multitude: (There are) six days on which it is lawful to work: on them then come, and let them be healed, and on (the) day of (the) sabbath not.'
13:15 But Jesus answered him and said: Hypocrites, doth not each of you unloose his cow or his ass from the manger on (the) sabbath, and taketh them and giveth them to drink?
13:16 And this (woman), being a daughter of Abraam, whom Satan bound, lo, eighteen years; was it not lawful to loose her from this bond on (the) day of (the) sabbath?'
13:17 And (as he is) speaking these (things), they who were against him were (imperf.) all ashamed: and all the people were rejoicing over all the noble things which were done by him.
13:18 He was saying then: To what was the kingdom of God like? and to what am I to liken it?
13:19 It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, he sowed it in his garden; and it grew and became a tree; and the birds of (the) heaven lodged upon its branches.'
13:20 And again he said: To what am I to liken the kingdom of God?
13:21 It is like leaven, which a woman took, she hid it in three measures of meal, until all was leavened.'
13:22 And he was walking (through) every city and village, teaching, and making his journey to Jerusalem.
13:23 And one said to him: Lord, (are there) few who will be saved?' And he said to them:
13:24 Strive to come in at the narrow door: because there are many, I say to you, (who) will seek for coming in, and they shall not be able.
13:25 If the owner-of-the-house should come to rise, and shut the door, and ye begin to stand outside, and to knock the door, [and] saying: "Lord, open to us;" and he answer and say to you: "I know you not whence ye are."
13:26 Then ye shall begin to say: "We ate before thee and we drank, and thou taughtest in our streets;"
13:27 and he will say: "I know you not whence ye are; go from me, all the workers of [the] unrighteousness."
13:28 (In) that place will be (the) weeping and (the) gnashing of the teeth, when ye should see Abraam, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, but yourselves cast out.
13:29 And they shall come from the risings and the settings, and (the) north and the south, and they shall sit down to meat in the kingdom of God.
13:30 And lo, there are last about to be first, and first about to be last.'
13:31 And in that day the Pharisees came to him, saying to him: 'Go, and depart (from) this (place); because Herod wishes to kill thee.'
13:32 And he said to them: Go, say to this fox (fem.): "Lo, I cast out devils, and perform cures to-day and to-morrow, and on the third day I shall (lit. will) finish."
13:33 But I must have (lit. make) to-day and to-morrow and the next day (lit. which cometh), and go: because it is not right (lit. set) that a prophet should perish outside of Jerusalem.
13:34 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killed the prophets, and cast stones upon them who were sent to her! How many times I wished to gather thy sons, as a hen (gathereth) her (lit. his) brood under her (lit. his) wings, and ye wished not!
13:35 Behold, your house is left to you: and I say to you, that ye shall not see me henceforth, until ye say: "Blessed is he who cometh in (the) name of the Lord."'
14:1 And it came to pass that (lit. and) he having come into (the) house of a ruler of the Pharisees on (the) sabbath to eat bread, they were observing him.
14:2 And lo, there was a man who had the dropsy, set before him.
14:3 And Jesus answered, he said to the lawyers and the Pharisees, saying: 'It it lawful to do good on (the) sabbath or not? '
14:4 And they held their peace. And he took hold of him, he cured him, he sent him away.
14:5 And he said to them: Which (is there) of you--whose ass or his cow will fall into a well, and he will not draw (lit. bring) him up on (the) day of the sabbaths?'
14:6 And they could not answer him against these (things).
14:7 And he was speaking (lit. saying) a parable to them who were invited, seeing how they were choosing for themselves the first seats, saying:
14:8 When one should invite thee to marriage feasts, sit not down to meat at the first seat, lest another more noble than thou was invited,
14:9 and he who invited thee and him come and say to thee: "Leave the place for this (one);" then thou wilt begin with shame to occupy the last place.
14:10 But when thou shouldest be invited, go, sit down to meat in the last (place), that, when he who invited thee should come, he may say to thee: "My friend, remove thee up (higher):" then there shall be glory for thee before all who sit down to meat with thee.
14:11 Because every one who will exalt himself will be humiliated, and he who will humiliate himself will be exalted.'
14:12 And he was saying to him who invited him: When thou shouldest make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brothers, nor thy kinsfolk, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they invite thee also, and a recompense be made to thee.
14:13 But if thou shouldest make a feast, call poor, impotent, lame, blind:
14:14 and thou wilt be blessed; because they have not (wherewith) to recompense thee: for thou wilt be recompensed in the resurrection of the righteous.'
14:15 And one of them who sat at meat, having heard these (things), said: Blessed is he who will eat bread in the kingdom of God.'
14:16 But he said to him: (There was) a man who made a great supper; and invited many:
14:17 and he sent his servant at (the) hour of supper to say to them who were invited, to make them come: "Now all things are prepared."
14:18 And they all began to make excuse with one voice (lit. cry). The first said: "I bought a field, and there is necessity for me to go out and see it: I beseech thee, put me from thee as that I do not conic."
14:19 And another said: "I bought five yoke (lit. plough) of oxen, and I shall (lit. will) go and prove them: I beseech thee, put me from thee as that I come not."
14:20 And another said: "I have taken a wife, and therefore I shall (lit. will) not come."
14:21 And the servant having come, told his lord. Then the owner-of-the-house having been angry said to his servant: "Go out quickly to the streets and the lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the impotent, and the blind."
14:22 And the servant said: "Lord, the thing which thou commandedst was done, and yet there is room."
14:23 And the lord of the servant said to him: "Go out to the roads and the hedges, and compel to come in, that my house may be filled:
14:24 For I say to you, that none of those men who were invited shall taste of my supper."'
14:25 And great multitudes were walking with him: and having turned, he said to them:
14:26 He who cometh to me, and who will not hate his father, and his mother, and his wife, and his sons, and his brothers, and his sisters, and further even his very life, it is not possible for him to be disciple to me.
14:27 (27)
14:28 For which of you, wishing to build a tower, will not sit first and count the cost, whether he have (wherewith) to complete it?
14:29 Lest he lay the foundation, and it is not possible to finish it; and all who see begin to mock him,
14:30 saying: "This man began to build, and he could not finish it."
14:31 Or what king, who will go to (the) war to fight with another king, will not sit first and take counsel, whether it is possible for him with ten thousand to meet him who cometh upon him with twenty thousand?
14:32 Otherwise, while he is yet distant from him, he sendeth an embassy, seeking for peace.
14:33 Thus for every one who is among you, who will not renounce all his possessions, it is not possible to be disciple to me.
14:34 [The] salt is good: but if the salt lose its savour, with what is it to be salted?
14:35 Neither (for) the earth nor the dunghill is it useful: but they cast it out. He who hath ears to hear, let him hear.'
15:1 And all the publicans and the sinners were drawing themselves near to him to hear him.
15:2 And the Pharisees and the scribes were murmuring, saying that this (man) receiveth the sinners to him, and eateth with them.
15:3 He spake (lit. said) this parable to them, saying:
15:4 What man who is among you, who hath a hundred sheep, if he should lose one of them,--leaveth he not the ninety-nine on (the) desert, and goeth, and seeketh for that which was lost, until he find it?
15:5 And if he should find it, he placeth it upon his shoulders, rejoicing.
15:6 And if he should come to the house, he calleth his friends and his neighbours, saying to them: "Rejoice all with me, because I found my sheep which was lost.
15:7 I say to you, that there is joy to be in (the) heaven over one sinner repenting, (more) than over the ninety-nine righteous.
15:8 Or what woman who has ten half didrachmas, if she should lose one of them, lighteth not a lamp, and sweepeth the house, and seeketh carefully until she find it?
15:9 And if she should find it, she calleth her friends and neighbours, saying: "Rejoice with me, because I found my half didrachma which was lost."
15:10 Thus I say to you, that there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner repenting.'
15:11 And he said: There was a man who had two sons:
15:12 and the younger of (lit. who was in) them said to his father: "My father, give to me my portion of the substance." And he divided the living among them.
15:13 And after not many days the younger son gathered everything, he went to (the) foreign (land) to a distant country; and he scattered his substance there, living dissolutely.
15:14 And having quite spent everything, a great famine happened in that country; and he also began to be in want.
15:15 And he went, he joined himself to one of the citizens of that country; and he sent him to (the) field to feed swine.
15:16 And he was desiring to fill his belly with the pods which the swine were eating: and there was no one giving to him.
15:17 But his right-mind (lit. heart) having come to him, he said: "How many are there of hirelings of my father, (who) have [the] bread in abundance, and I shall (lit. will) perish here in famine!
15:18 I will rise and go to my father, and say to him: My father, I sinned against (the) heaven, and before thee:
15:19 I am no longer worthy to be called "thy son:" make me as one of thy hirelings.'"
15:20 And he rose, he came to his father. But yet being distant from him, his father saw him, and had compassion, he ran, he threw himself upon his neck, and kissed his mouth.
15:21 And his son said to him: "My father, I sinned against (the) heaven, and before thee: I am not worthy any longer to be called thy son.'"
15:22 And his father said to his servants: "Be quick, bring out the first robe, and clothe him; and put (lit. give) a ring on (lit. to) his hand, and shoe on (lit. to) his feet:
15:23 and bring the fatted calf, slay it, and let us eat, and delight ourselves:
15:24 because this my son was (imperf.) dead, and lived; he was (imperf.) lost, and we found him." And they began to delight themselves.
15:25 Now his elder (lit. great) son was (imperf.) in (the) field: and as he (is) coming up, he approached to the house, he heard music and dances.
15:26 And having called one of the servants (lit. children), he was asking him what were these (things).
15:27 And he said to him: "Thy brother came; and thy father slew the fatted calf, because he received him in health."
15:28 But he was angry, and wished not to come in: and his father having come out, was beseeching him.
15:29 But he having answered, said to his father: "Lo, how many years do I serve thee? and I never transgressed a commandment of thine: and to me thou never gavest a kid, that I might delight myself with my friends:
15:30 but when thy son came, he (lit. this) who ate (up) his living with the harlots, thou killedst for him the fatted calf."
15:31 And he said to him: "My son, thou art with me always, and all the things which are mine are thine.
15:32 It was (imperf.) right that we should delight ourselves and rejoice: because this thy brother was (imperf.) dead, and he lived; he was (imperf.) lost, and we found him."'
16:1 And he was saying to the disciples: 'There was a rich man, who had a steward; and this (man) was accused before him as scattering his possessions.
16:2 And having called him, he said to him: "What is this which I hear concerning thee? Give (the) account of the stewardship; for thou wilt be steward no longer."
16:3 And the steward said in himself: "What shall (lit. will) I do? My lord will take away the stewardship from me. I shall (lit. will) not be able to dig; and I am ashamed to need alms.
16:4 I know (lit. knew) what I will do, that, when I should be cast out of the stewardship, they may receive me to them into their houses."
16:5 And having called each of the debtors of his lord, he was saying to the first: "How much owest thou to my lord?"
16:6 And he said: "A hundred baths of oil." And heo said: "Take thy writings, sit and quickly write fifty."
16:7 Then he said to another: "And how much owest thou?" And he said: "A hundred cors of wheat." He said to him: "Take thy writings, and write eighty."
16:8 And the lord commended the steward of [the] unrighteousness because he did wisely: because the sons of this age are wiser than the sons of (the) light in their generation.
16:9 And I also say to you: "Make for you friends out of mamon of (the) unrighteousness; that, when they should fail, they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles."
16:10 The faithful in little is faithful also in great: and he who taketh by violence in little, taketh by violence also in great.
16:11 If then in the unrighteous mamon ye were not faithful, who then will be able to entrust you with the true?
16:12 And if in that which is not yours ye were not faithful, who will be able to give to you that which is yours?
16:13 No servant will be able to serve two lords: for either he will hate one, and the other he will love; or he will hearken to one, and the other he will despise. It is not possible for you to serve God and mamon.'
16:14 And the Pharisees who were lovers of silver were hearing all these (things), and they were deriding him.
16:15 And he said to them: Ye are they who justify themselves before the men; but God knoweth your hearts: because (the) pride which is in the man is an abomination before God.
16:16 The law and the prophets (were) until John: from that time the kingdom of God is preached, and every one taketh himself by violence into it.
16:17 But it is easier that (the) heaven and (the) earth pass away, than that a point fall from the law.
16:18 Every one who putteth away his wife, and who taketh another committeth adultery: and he who taketh her who is put away from her husband committeth adultery.
16:19 Now there was a rich man, and he used to clothe himself with purple and fine linen, delighting (himself) daily sumptuously:
16:20 and a beggar also, his name being Lazarus, lying (lit. thrown) into his porch, being (full) of wounds,
16:21 and desiring to fill his belly with the things which fall from the table of the rich (man); moreover, even the dogs were coming, licking his wounds.
16:22 And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and he was taken away by angels to the bosom of Abraam: and the rich man also died, and he was embalmed.
16:23 And in Amenti having lifted up his eyes, being in pains, he saw Abraam afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
16:24 And he having called said: "My father Abraam, pity me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; because I am in pain in this fiame."
16:25 Abraam said: "My son, remember that thou finishedst receiving thy good (things) in thy life, and Lazarus also the evil (things): but now he is comforted here, and thou art in pain.
16:26 And beside (lit. in) all these (things) there is a great pit fixed between us and you, that they who wish to pass from here (lit. this) to you should not be able, nor they who are with you to cross to us."
16:27 And he said: "I beseech thee, my father, that thou wouldest send him to (the) house of my father;
16:28 for I have five brothers; that he may bear witness to them, that they may not come also to this place of this pain."
16:29 And Abraam said: "They have Moses and the prophets; let them hearken to them.
16:30 And he said: "Nay, my father, Abraam: but if one should go to them from the dead they will repent."
16:31 And he said to him: "If they will hearken not to Moses and the prophets, neither, if one should rise from the dead, will they be persuaded."'
17:1 And he said to his disciples: 'It is necessary that the offences come: but woe to him by whom the offence cometh!
17:2 It is good for him, that a millstone be hanged to him, and that he be cast into the sea, (rather) than that he offend one of these little ones.
17:3 Give heed to yourselves: if thy brother should sin, rebuke him; and if he should repent, forgive him.
17:4 And if he should sin against thee seven times in the day, and return to thee seven times, saying: "I repent;" forgive him.'
17:5 And the apostles said to the Lord: Add faith to us.'
17:6 And the Lord said: If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye would say to the sycamine-tree: "Be plucked up, and grow up in the sea; and it would hearken to you.
17:7 And which of you, who hath a servant ploughing or feeding, (is it) who, if he should come in from (the) field, will say immediately to him: "Come up, sit down to meat'?"
17:8 Will he not say to him: "Prepare that which I shall (lit. will) eat, and gird thyself, minister to me, until I eat and drink; and after these (things) thou also eat and drink?
17:9 Hath he thanks for the servant, because he did the things which he commanded him?
17:10 Thus ye also, if ye should do all things which were commanded you, say: "We (are) unprofitable servants; that which we ought to do, we did."'
17:11 It came to pass (as he is) going up to Jerusalem, that (lit. and) he was passing through (the) midst of (the) Samaria and Galilee.
17:12 And being about to go into a village, ten men, lepers, met him; and they were standing afar off:
17:13 and they were lifting-up their voice, saying: Jesus, the Teacher, pity us.'
17:14 And having seen, he said to them: Go shew yourselves to the priest.' And it came to pass (that as they are) going they were cleansed.
17:15 And one of them, having seen that he recovered, returned with a loud voice glorifying God.
17:16 And he threw himself upon his face at his feet, giving thanks to him: and this (one) was a Samaritan.
17:17 And Jesus answered, he said: 'Were not the ten cleansed? where are the other nine? is
17:18 And there were not found who returned to glorify God, except this alien.'
17:19 And he said to him: 'Rise, go, thy faith saved thee.'
17:20 And the Pharisees having asked him, when the kingdom of God is to come, he answered them, and said: 'The kingdom of God was not to come with (lit. in) observation:
17:21 neither will they say that it is here, or it is there; for behold, the kingdom of God (is) inside of you.'
17:22 And he said to his disciples: Days come, when ye will desire to see one of the days of (the) Son of (the) man, and ye shall not see.
17:23 And they shall say to you: "Lo, he is there, or he is here:" go not, nor run:
17:24 as the lightning manifesteth itself in (the) heaven, and giveth light below (the) heaven: this is as (the) Son of (the) man will be in his day.
17:25 But first he must suffer much, and this generation reject him.
17:26 And according as it was in the days of Noe, thus will it be in the days of (the) Son of God.
17:27 They were eating, and they were drinking, they were taking wives, they were taking husbands, until the day (in) which Noe went into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed every one.
17:28 As again it was in the days of Lot; they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building;
17:29 but in the day (in) which Lot came from Sodom, he rained fire and brimstone from (the) heaven, and destroyed every one.
17:30 According to these same (things) again it is to be in the day in which (the) Son of (the) man will be revealed.
17:31 And in that day he who is upon (the) housetop, and his goods being in the house, make him not come down to take them away: and he who is in (the) field--likewise (lit. thus again) make him not return back.
17:32 Remember (the) wife of Lot.
17:33 He who will seek for saving his life (lit. soul) will lose it: he who will lose it shall make it live.
17:34 I say to you, that in this night two shall be upon one bed; the one shall be taken away, and the other shall be left.
17:35 Two women shall be grinding in a place; one shall be taken away, and the other shall be left.'
17:36 (36)
17:37 And they answered, they said to him: In what place, Lord?' And he said to them: 'The place in which (the) body is, the eagles also will assemble thither.'
18:1 And he was speaking (lit, saying) a parable to them for their praying always, and that they should not faint,
18:2 saying: There was a judge in a city, he feareth not before God, and he is not ashamed before [the] men:
18:3 and there was a widow in that city; and she was coming to him, saying: "Avenge me of him who offereth me violence."
18:4 And he was not wishing (to do it) for (lit. until) a time: but after these (things) he said in himself: "Let it be that I fear not before God, and am not ashamed before [the] men;
18:5 because that this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, that she may not come until the end (lit, out) troubling me."'
18:6 And the Lord said: Hear what the judge of [the] unrighteousness saith.
18:7 And will not God avenge his chosen, these who cry to him in the day and the night, and he is long-suffering over them?
18:8 Yea, I say to you, that he will avenge them quickly. But if (the) Son of (the) man should come, will he then find (the) faith upon the earth? '
18:9 He said concerning some, who said of (lit. to) themselves that (they) were righteous, and (were) despising also the rest, this parable, saying:
18:10 Two men went up to the temple to pray; the one was a Pharisee, the other was a publican.
18:11 And the Pharisee having stood was praying these (things) in himself: "God, I give thanks to thee that I am not as (the) rest of the men, extortioners, violent, adulterous, or even as this publican.
18:12 I fast twice a week; I give (the) tenth of all things which I get."
18:13 But the publican, standing afar off, was not wishing even to lift his eyes up to (the) heaven, but was striking upon (lit. in) his breast, saying: "God forgive me, because I (am) a sinner."
18:14 I say to you, that this (one) went down justified into his house (rather) than that (one): because every one who will exalt himself will be humiliated; but he who will humiliate himself will be exalted.'
18:15 And they were bringing to him children, that he might touch them: but the disciples having seen (it) were rebuking them.
18:16 But Jesus called them, saying: Permit the children to come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.
18:17 Verily I say to you, that he who will not receive the kingdom of God to him as this child, shall not come into it.'
18:18 And a ruler asked him, saying: Good Teacher, what shall (lit. will) I do that I may inherit eternal life?
18:19 And Jesus said to him: Wherefore sayest thou of me: "The good?" there is not any one good except God alone.
18:20 Thou knowest the commandments; commit not adultery, kill not, steal not, bear not false witness, honour thy father and thy mother.'
18:21 And he said: 'All these I kept from my childhood.'
18:22 And Jesus having heard, said to him: Yet (there) is another thing which thou lackest: sell all things which thou hast, and distribute them to the poor, and thou shalt get for thee a treasure in the heavens, and come, walk after me.'
18:23 But he having heard, was grieved, for he was very rich.
18:24 And Jesus having seen him, said: 'How difficult it is for them who have the riches to come into the kingdom of God!
18:25 For it is easy that a camel come in through (the) eye of the needle, (rather) than that a rich man come into the kingdom of God.'
18:26 And they who heard said: For whom, indeed, is it possible to be saved?'
18:27 But he said: "The things impossible for [the] men are possible for God.'
18:28 And Peter said: 'Lo, we laid (down) that we had, we walked after thee.'
18:29 And he said to them: Verily I say to you, that there is not any one who left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or sons, because of the kingdom of God,
18:30 (but) that he will receive them manifold in this time, and in the age which cometh), eternal life.'
18:31 And having brought (close) to him the twelve, he said to them: Lo, we shall (lit. will) go up to Jerusalem, and all things will be fulfilled, which are written by the prophets concerning (the) Son of (the) man.
18:32 For he will be delivered to the Gentiles, and he will he mocked, and he will be reviled, and they will spit upon him (lit. his face):
18:33 and if they should scourge him, they will kill him, and he will rise on the third day.'
18:34 And they understood not any of these (things); and the word was (imperf.) hidden from (lit. to) them, and they were not knowing the things which he was saying.
18:35 And it came to pass (that), he having approached Jericho, there was a blind man sitting by the road needing alms:
18:36 and having heard a multitude passing, he was asking: 'What is this?'
18:37 And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth (lit. the Nazôreos) passeth.
18:38 And he cried out, saying: Jesus, Son of David, pity me.'
18:39 And they who were walking before were rebuking him, that he should hold his peace: but he was rather crying out the more: Son of David, pity me.'
18:40 And Jesus having stood, commanded to bring him to him: and he having approached him, he asked him:
18:41 What wishest thou that I should do to thee?' And he said: My Lord, that I may see.'
18:42 And Jesus said to him: 'See: thy faith saved thee.'
18:43 And immediately he saw, and walked after him, glorifying God: and all the people having seen, blessed God.
19:1 And having entered, he was walking in Jericho.
19:2 And lo, a man, his name being called Zacchæus,' and this (one) was a chief publican, and he was rich.
19:3 And he was seeking to see Jesus, who (he) is; and he was not able because of the multitude, because he was little in his stature.
19:4 Having run on before, he went up on a sycomore tree, that he might see him: and he was passing by (lit. through) it.
19:5 And having come upon the place, Jesus gazed at him, he said to him: Zacchæus, haste thee, come down; for to-day I must abide in thy house.'
19:6 And he hasted himself, he came down, and received him to himself rejoicing.
19:7 And all they who saw, murmured, saying: `He went into (the) house of a man (who is) a sinner to rest himself.'
19:8 Zacchæus stood, he said to the Lord: `Lord, lo, I give (the) half of my possessions to the poor; and he from whom I took anything by violence, I shall (lit. will) restore (lit. double them) to him fourfold.'
19:9 And he said to him: To-day (the) salvation happened in this house, because he also is a son of Abraam.
19:10 For (the) Son of (the) man came to seek and to save that which was lost.'
19:11 And (as they are) hearing these (things), he added and (lit. to) said a parable, because that he was approaching Jerusalem, and they were thinking that the kingdom of God will appear immediately.
19:12 He said then: There was a nobleman, he went to a distant country to receive a kingdom, and to return.
19:13 And having called ten servants of his, he gave ten pounds to them, saying: "Trade in these until I come."
19:14 But his citizens were hating him, and they sent an embassy after (lit. behind) him, saying: "We wish not this (man) to be king over us."
19:15 And it came to pass (that) having returned, (after) having received the kingdom, he bid them call the servants, these to whom he gave the silver, that he might know what trading they did.
19:16 And the first came, saying: "My lord, thy pound made ten pounds."
19:17 And he said to him: "Well, good servant, because that thou wast faithful in little things. be thou having authority over ten cities."
19:18 And the second came, saying: "My lord, thy pound made five pounds."
19:19 And he said again to this (one) also: "Be thou too over five cities."
19:20 And the other came, saying: "My lord, behold, thy pound, it is with me; I wrapped it in a napkin:
19:21 I was fearing thee, because thou (art) a hard man: thou takest up that which thou laidst not down, and thou reapest that which thou sowedst not."
19:22 He said to him: "From thy mouth I will judge thee, Wicked servant. If thou knowest that I (am) a hard man, taking up that which I laid not down, and reaping that which I sowed not;
19:23 wherefore gavest thou not my silver to the bank, and if I should come, I should have required it with its increase?"
19:24 And he said to them who stood (by): "Take away the pound from this (man), and give it to him who hath the ten pounds.
19:25 (25)
19:26 I say to you, that to every one who hath, it shall be given; but from him who hath not, that which he hath will be taken away from him.
19:27 But my enemies, these who wished not me to be king over them, bring them here, and slaughter them before me." '
19:28 And having said these (things), he was walking on before, going up to Jerusalem.
19:29 And it came to pass, (that) having approached Bethphage and Bethany, at the mountain which they call, Of the Olives,' he sent two of his disciples,
19:30 saying: Go to this village which is in front of you; ye will find a colt tied, upon which no man ever mounted: loose him, bring him.
19:31 And if any one should ask you wherefore ye loose him, say thus: "The Lord hath need of him."'
19:32 And they, who were sent, having gone, found according as he said to them.
19:33 And (as they are) loosing the colt, his masters said to them: Wherefore loose ye the colt?'
19:34 And they said: The Lord hath need of him.'
19:35 And they brought him to Jesus: and having cast forth their garments upon the colt, they placed Jesus on him.
19:36 And (as they are) walking they were spreading their garments on the road.
19:37 And (as he is) about to approach now the place of coming down of the mountain of the Olives, all the multitude of the disciples began rejoicing, blessing God with a loud voice concerning all the mighty works which they saw;
19:38 saying: Blessed is the King who cometh in (the) name of the Lord: peace in (the) heaven, and glory in the highest.'
19:39 And some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him: Teacher, rebuke thy disciples.'
19:40 And he answered, he said: I say to you, that if these should hold their peace, these stones will cry out.'
19:41 And when he approached, having seen the city, he wept over it,
19:42 saying: If thou even wert knowing in this day the things of thy peace! but now they were hid from thine eyes.
19:43 Because days will come upon thee, and thine enemies will enclose thee with a palisade, and they will surround thee, and they will press thee on every side,
19:44 and they shall hurl thee down, and thy sons in thee; and they shall not leave a stone upon a stone in thee; because that thou knewest not (the) time of thy visitation.'
19:45 And having entered the temple, he began to cast out them who sold,
19:46 saying to them: ' It is written, that my house shall be a house of prayer: but ye made it a cave of robbers.'
19:47 And he was teaching daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the first of the people were seeking to destroy him:
19:48 and they were not finding that which they will do; for all the people were hanging upon him, hearing him.
20:1 And it came to pass in one of the days, (that as he is) teaching in the temple, and preaching good tidings, the chief priests and the scribes and the elders stood;
20:2 and they said to him: 'Say to us, with what authority didst thou these things? or who gave this authority to thee?'
20:3 He answered, he said to them I will also ask you a word, and say it to me.
20:4 The baptism of John, was it from (the) heaven or from [the] men?'
20:5 And they took counsel with one another, saying: If we should say, that it is from (the) heaven, he will say: "Wherefore believed ye him not?"
20:6 But if we should say, that it is from [the] men, all the people will stone us, for they are persuaded that John is a prophet.'
20:7 And they answered: We know not whence it is.'
20:8 And Jesus said to them: Neither will I say to you with what authority I did these things.'
20:9 And he began to speak to the people this parable: There was a man who planted a vineyard, and gave it to husbandmen, and went to (the) foreign (land) for a long time.
20:10 And in (the) time he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they might give to him of (the) fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen having beaten him, thrust him away empty.
20:11 And further (lit. he added to) again he sent to them another servant: and they having beaten this (lit. the) other (one), and having reviled him, thrust him away empty.
20:12 And further (lit. he added to) again be sent the third; and they wounded this other (one), they cast him out.
20:13 And the Lord of the vineyard said: "What shall (lit. will) I do? I shall (lit. will) send my beloved son: perhaps they may be ashamed before him."
20:14 But the husbandmen having seen him, were taking counsel with one another, saying: "This is the heir; come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be for us."
20:15 And having cast him outside of the vineyard, they killed him. What will the Lord of the vineyard do to them?
20:16 He will come, and will destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard to others.' And having heard, they said: 'It shall not be.'
20:17 But he having gazed at them, said: 'What is this which is written, that the stone which the builders rejected, this was made for  a completion of (the) corner?
20:18 Every one who will fall upon that stone will be broken to pieces; but upon whom it will fall, it will scatter him as dust.'
20:19 And the scribes and the chief priests were seeking to lay (lit. bring) their hands upon him, even (lit. and) in that hour; and they feared the people: for they knew that he spake (lit. said) this parable concerning them.
20:20 And having observed (him), they sent to him men of subtlety, using hypocrisy, saying of themselves that (they were) righteous, that they might catch him by word, so as to give him to the rule and the authority of the governor.
20:21 And they asked him, saying: Teacher, we know that thou speakest rightly and teachest, and acceptest not person, but truly teachest the road of God:
20:22 is it lawful to give tax to (the) king, or not?'
20:23 But having observed their craftiness, he said:
20:24 Shew to me a stater.' And they shewed to him. And he said to them: The image and the superscription which are on it--whose are they?' And they said: (The) king's are they.'
20:25 And he said to them: Now give (the) king's (things) to (the) king, and give God's (things) to God.'
20:26 And they could not overpower him in a word before the people: and having wondered at his answerings, they held their peace.
20:27 And some (men), namely, Sadducees, who say that there is not resurrection, having come, asked him,
20:28 saying: Teacher, Moses wrote to us, that if (the) brother of any one should die having wife, and this (man) have no son, [that] his brother should take his wife and raise up seed to his brother.
20:29 There were then seven brothers: and the first having taken the wife died, being without son.
20:30 And the second took her;
20:31 and the third; and thus unto the seventh; they left not son, and they died.
20:32 And at (the) end the woman also herself died.
20:33 In the resurrection then, of which of them is she to be the wife? for the seven took her for wife.'
20:34 And Jesus said to them: The sons of this age take (to wife) and are taken:
20:35 but they who were worthy of that age, and the resurrection [the] from the dead, neither take, nor are taken (to wife):
20:36 for neither is it possible that they should die any more: for they are equal to angels; and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
20:37 But that the dead will rise, Moses also gave sign in the (place concerning) the bush, as he saith: "The Lord, God of Abraam, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob."
20:38 God is not (the God) of them who are dead, but of them who are alive; for all are alive to him.'
20:39 And some of the scribes answered, they said: Teacher, thou saidst well.'
20:40 For they were not able to dare any more to ask him anything.
20:41 And he said to them: How say they, that Christ is (the) son of David?
20:42 For David himself saith in (the) book of the Psalms: "The Lord said to my Lord: Sit thou on my right hand,
20:43 until I put thine enemies below thy feet.'"
20:44 David then calleth him "My Lord," so (lit. and) how is he his son?'
20:45 And all the people hearing (it), he said to his disciples:
20:46 Beware of the scribes, who wish to walk in robes, and (are) loving the salutations in the market-places, and the first sittings in the synagogues, and the first places in the feasts.
20:47 Who eat the houses of the widows, and in pretence prolonged they pray: these shall receive more judgement.'
21:1 And having gazed up, he saw rich men throwing their gifts into the treasuries.
21:2 He saw a poor widow also throwing thither two mites.
21:3 And he said: 'Truly I say to you, that this poor widow threw (more) than all these:
21:4 for these threw the gifts from their superfluity: this (one), she, from her deficiency, threw all her living which she had (import.).
21:5 And (as) some (are) saying concerning the temple, that it was garnished with (lit. down in) good stones and offerings, he said:
21:6 Ye see all these (things): days come in (which) a stone will not be left upon a stone here, (which) will not be pulled down."'
21:7 And they asked him: Teacher, when will these (things) happen? and what is the sign, if these (things) should be going to happen?'
21:8 And he said: Take heed, go not astray: for there are many (who) will come in (lit. to) my name, saying: "I am (he). And (the) time approached." Walk not behind them.
21:9 And when ye should hear wars and tumults, be not frightened; but not immediately is the end.'
21:10 Then he was saying to them: Nation shall rise upon nation, and kingdom upon kingdom:
21:11 and great earthquakes shall be, and there shall be famines and deaths in different places; and fears and great signs shall be from (the) heaven.
21:12 But before all these (things) they shall lay (lit. bring) their hands upon you, and they will persecute you, delivering you to synagogues and prisons, bringing you to the kings and the governors because of my name.
21:13 And it (lit. he) shall be to you for a witness.
21:14 Set it then in your hearts, not to meditate beforehand what ye will answer:
21:15 for I will give to you a mouth and a wisdom, which all, who are against you, will not be able to oppose, nor will they be able to contradict it.
21:16 But ye will be delivered (up) by parents, and brothers, and kinsfolk, and friends; and they will kill (some) of you.
21:17 And ye shall be hated by all (lit, be, all hating you) because of my name.
21:18 And a hair of your head shall not perish.
21:19 And in your patience ye (are) possessing your souls.
21:20 When ye should see Jerusalem (with) soldiers surrounding her, then know that her desolation approached.
21:21 Then they who are in Judea let them flee upon the mountains; and they who are in her midst let them flee out; and they who are in the countries make them not enter her.
21:22 Because these are the days of (the) vengeance, for all things which are written to be fulfilled.
21:23 But woe to them who are with child, and them who give suck in those days! for great distress shall be upon (the) earth, and anger for this people.
21:24 And they shall fall by (lit. in) the edge (lit. mouth) of (the) sword, and they shall be led captive to all the Gentiles: and Jerusalem shall be trodden upon by Gentiles (lit. Gentiles treading upon her), until times be fulfilled; and there shall be times of Gentiles.
21:25 And there shall be signs in (the) sun, and the moon, and the stars; and tribulation of nations shall be upon the earth, in perplexity for (the) voice of the sea and (the) storm;
21:26 men (with) their heart (lit, soul) failing (lit. coming from) them from (the) fear, and (the) expectation of the things which come upon the world: for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
21:27 And they shall see (the) Son of (the) man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
21:28 But (as) these (things) are about to begin to happen, look up, and raise your heads; because your redemption approacheth.'
21:29 And he spake (lit. said) a parable to them: See the fig-tree and all the trees:
21:30 if now they (are) about to unloose (their leaves), seeing by them, ye know that the summer approached.
21:31 Thus ye also, if ye should see these (things) about to happen, know that the kingdom of God approached.
21:32 Verily I say to you, that this generation shall not pass away, until all these things be accomplished.
21:33 (The) heaven and (the) earth will pass away: but my words shall not pass away.
21:34 But give heed to yourselves, lest haply your hearts be heavy in surfeitings, and drunkenness (plur.), and cares of life, and suddenly that day come upon you
21:35 as a snare: for it shall come upon all who are (lit. sit) upon (the) face of all (the) earth.
21:36 Watch then always, praying that ye may be able to escape all these things which will happen, and stand before (the) Son of (the) man.'
21:37 And he was spending (lit. doing) the days, teaching in the temple;  and the nights he was coming forth, resting himself upon the mountain which is called, 'of the Olives.'
21:38 And all the people were (coming) early to him in the temple to hear him.
22:1 Now (the) feast of the unleavened was approaching, which is called, 'the Passover.'
22:2 And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking in what manner they are to destroy him; for they were fearing the people.
22:3 And Satan entered (the) heart of Judas who is called, '(the) Iscariot,' being of the twelve.
22:4 And he went, he spake to the chief priests and the captains concerning (the) manner to deliver him to them.
22:5 And they rejoiced, and they settled with him to give to him silver.
22:6 And he consented, and he was seeking for opportunity that he might deliver him to them without multitude.
22:7 And the day of the unleavened came, in which the passover must be slain.
22:8 And he sent Peter and John, (saying): 'Go, prepare the passover for us, that we may eat it.'
22:9 And they said to him: 'Where wishest thou to prepare it
22:10 And he said to them: 'Lo, (as ye are) about to go into the city, a man will meet you carrying a pitcher of water; walk after him to the house which he will enter.
22:11 And say to the owner [of house] of the house: "The Teacher said to thee: Which is the place in which I shall (lit. will) eat my passover with my disciples?'"
22:12 And that (man) will show to you a great room (lit. place) aloft, spread; prepare it there.'
22:13 And having gone, they found according as he said to them, and they prepared the passover.
22:14 And the hour came, he sat down to meat, and the twelve apostles with him.
22:15 And he said to them: With (lit. in) desire I desired to eat my passover with you before I suffer.
22:16 I say to you, that I shall not eat it, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.'
22:17 And having taken a cup, he gave thanks, he said: Take this, divide it among you:
22:18 for I say to you, that I shall not drink henceforth of (the) fruit of this vine, until the kingdom of God come.'
22:19 And having taken bread, he gave thanks, he brake it, and gave it to them, saying: This is my body which will be given for you: this do for my remembrance.'
22:20 And the cup likewise (lit. thus again) after the supper, saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood for you.
22:21 But lo, (the) hand of him who will deliver me (up) is with me upon the table.
22:22 Because (the) Son of (the) man indeed will go according as it is appointed: but woe to that man by whom he will be delivered (up)!'
22:23 And they began to ask of (lit. with) one another, which then of them will do this.
22:24 And there was again a contention among them, which of them is the great (one).
22:25 And he said to them: The kings of the Gentiles are lords to them; and they who are in authority over them are called, "the benefactors."
22:26 But ye (are) not thus: but the great (one) who is among you--let him be as the young man; and the chief as the minister (lit. deacon).
22:27 For which is the great (one), he that sitteth down to meat or he that serveth (lit. is deacon)? Is not he who sitteth down to meat? I am in your midst as he who serveth (lit. is deacon).
22:28 But ye (are) they who stayed with me in my temptations.
22:29 I also will establish with you according as my Father established with me a kingdom,
22:30 that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom; and sitting upon thrones ye shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel.
22:31 Simon, Simon, behold, Satan shall ask for you to sift you as the wheat:
22:32 but I prayed for thee, that thy faith might not fail: and thou also return at once, strengthen thy brothers.'
22:33 And he said to him: Lord, I am prepared to go to (the) prison with thee and (the) death.'
22:34 And he said to him: 'I say to thee, Peter, that a cock shall not crow to-day, until thou deniest me three times, that thou knowest.'
22:35 And he said to them: When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoe, were ye in want of anything?' And they said: 'No (lit. of that).'
22:36 And he said to them: ' But now he who hath a purse, let him take it up, thus again a scrip: and he who hath not, let him sell his garment, let him buy a sword.
22:37 For I say to you, that that which is written must be fulfilled in me: He was numbered with the transgressors:" for that which is written concerning me hath its end.'
22:38 And they said: 'Lord, lo, two swords (are) here.' And he said to them: They suffice.'
22:39 And having come forth, he went, according to the custom, to the mountain of the Olives; and the disciples also walked after him.
22:40 And having come to the place, he said to them: Pray that ye shall come not to temptation.'
22:41 And he separated from them about a stone's cast (lit. the space to cast a stone forth); and having thrown himself upon his knees, he prayed,
22:42 saying: 'My Father, if thou wishest, let the cup pass from me: but not my will, but let thine be done.'
22:43 (43)
22:44 (44)
22:45 And having risen from the prayer, he came to the disciples, he found them sleeping for (lit. from the) grief.
22:46 And he said to them: 'Wherefore sleep ye? rise, pray that ye may not come into temptation.'
22:47 (As he is) yet speaking, behold a multitude, and he who is called, 'Judas,' one of the twelve, was walking before them, and he approached Jesus, he kissed his mouth.
22:48 And Jesus said to him: Judas, art thou to deliver (up the) Son of (the) man with a kiss?'
22:49 And they who were around him, having seen that which happened, said: 'Lord, (wilt thou) that we strike with (the) sword?'
22:50 And one of them struck at (the) servant of the chief priest, and took off his right ear.
22:51 And Jesus answered, he said: It is sufficient thus far (lit. until here).' And having touched his ear, he cured him.
22:52 And Jesus said to them who came at him, the chief priests, and the captains of the temple, and the elders: 'Came ye out, as coming at a robber with staves?
22:53 Being in the temple with you daily, ye stretched not (out) your hands upon me: but this is your hour, and (the) authority of (the) darkness.'
22:54 And having laid hold on him, they brought him, and took him into (the) house of the chief priest. Peter was walking after him afar off.
22:55 And (they) having lighted a fire in (the) midst of the court, and having sat, Peter also was sitting in their midst.
22:56 And a young maid servant having seen him sitting by the light, and having gazed, said: This (man) also was (imperf.) with him.'
22:57 But he denied, saying: I know him not, Woman.'
22:58 And after another little (time), another having seen him, said: Thou (art) of them also.' But Peter said: 'Man, I am not.'
22:59 And (the) space of an hour having been, another was affirming of him, saying: 'In truth this (man) also was (imperf.) with him: for (he) is a Galilæan.'
22:60 But Peter said: Man, I know not that which thou sayest.' And immediately, (as he is) yet speaking, a cock crew.
22:61 And the Lord, having turned himself, gazed at Peter. And Peter remembered (the) word of the Lord, as he said to him: Before a cock crow to-day, thou wilt deny me three times.'
22:62 And having come forth, he wept bitterly.
22:63 And the men, who were laying hold on him, were mocking him, beating him.
22:64 And having covered him, they were asking him, saying: Prophesy to us, who beat thee.'
22:65 And many other things they were saying against him, blaspheming.
22:66 And the day having come, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes assembled, and brought him into their council,
22:67 saying: If thou art Christ, say to us.' He said to them: If I should say to you, ye will not believe:
22:68 and if I also should ask you, ye will not answer.
22:69 Henceforth (the) Son of (the) man shall be sitting at the right hand of the power of God.'
22:70 And they all said: Art thou then (the) Son of God?' And he said to them: Ye say that I am.'
22:71 And they said: (Are) we having further need of witness? For we ourselves heard (it) from his mouth.'
23:1 And their whole multitude rose, they brought him to Pilate.
23:2 And they began to accuse him, saying: This (man) we found, who perverteth our nation, and (is) forbidding to give tax to (the) king, saying of himself: "I am Christ (the) king." '
23:3 And Pilate asked him, saying: Art thou (the) king of the Jews?' And he answered Thou sayest.'
23:4 And Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes: 'I find not any fault in this man.'
23:5 But they were more urgent (lit. finding power), saying: He troubleth the people, teaching in all Judea, having begun from Galilee unto this place.'
23:6 But Pilate, having heard, was asking whether this man is a Galilæan.
23:7 And having known that he was (lit. is) under (lit. from) (the) authority of Herod, he sent him to Herod, he also being in Jerusalem in those days.
23:8 Now Herod, having seen Jesus, rejoiced greatly: for he was wishing to see him for (lit. from) much time, because that he was hearing concerning him; and he was hoping to see a sign done by him (lit. from him doing it).
23:9 And he was asking him with many words; but he answered not anything.
23:10 The chief priests and the scribes were standing accusing him greatly.
23:11 And Herod with his soldiers having reviled him, and having mocked him, arrayed him in gorgeous raiment, he sent him to Pilate.
23:12 And Pilate and Herod became friends to one another in that day: for before they were (imperf.) in enmity to one another.
23:13 And Pilate, having called the chief priests and the rulers and the people,
23:14 said to them: Ye brought to me this man, as perverting the people: and lo, I, having examined him before you, found not any fault in this man as to the things in which ye accuse him.
23:15 But neither Herod also: for he sent him to us and lo, there is not any work in him, which he did, being worthy of (the) death.
23:16 (Let) me chastise (lit. teach) him then, and release him.'
23:17 (17)
23:18 But all the multitude cried out: 'Take away this (man), release Barabbas to us.'
23:19 This (man was one) who was cast into (the) prison because of a tumult and a murder having happened in the city.
23:20 And again Pilate called them, wishing to release Jesus:
23:21 but they cried out, saying: 'Crucify him, crucify him.'
23:22 And he said to them (the) third time: 'Why, what evil did this (man)? I found not any cause of (the) death in him; (let) me chastise (lit. teach) him then, and release him.'
23:23 But they persisted with loud voices, asking him that he might be crucified. And their voices were more urgent.
23:24 And Pilate gave judgement that their request should be done.
23:25 And he released him who was cast into (the) prison because of a murder and tumult, whom they asked (for); but Jesus he delivered (up) according to their wish.
23:26 And as they (are) bringing him forth, they laid hold on one (named) 'Simon,' a Cyrenian, coming from (the) field; they placed the cross upon him, to carry (lit. raise) it behind him.
23:27 And a great multitude of the people was walking after him, and women who were lamenting and were wailing for him.
23:28 But Jesus, having turned himself to them, said: Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not over me, but weep over yourselves, and over your sons.
23:29 Because lo, days come, in which they will say: "Blessed are the barren, and the wombs which bare not, and the breasts which fed not."
23:30 Then they will begin to say to the mountains: "Fall upon us;" and the hills: "Cover us."
23:31 Because if they do these (things) in the green (lit. moist) tree, what will be done in the withered?'
23:32 And they were bringing two malefactors also with him to kill them.
23:33 And having come upon the place which is called, the skull,' they crucified him there, and the malefactors, one indeed on the right hand, and one on the left hand.
23:34 And they divided his garments among them, they cast lot for them.
23:35 And the people were (sing.) standing, seeing (it). And the rulers also were deriding, saying: He saved others; let him save himself also; if this is Christ (the) Son of God, the chosen.'
23:36 And the soldiers also were mocking him; coming to him, they brought vinegar to him,
23:37 saying: If thou art (the) king of the Jews, save thyself.'
23:38 And there was also a superscription over him: 'This is (the) king of the Jews.'
23:39 And one of the malefactors, who were crucified with him, blasphemed him, saying: Art not thou Christ? Save thyself, and save us also.'
23:40 But the other answered, he rebuked him, he said: Fearest thou not even God, because we were in this one judgement?
23:41 And we indeed justly; having received according to (what was, lit. the) worthy of the things which we did: but this (man) did not anything evil.'
23:42 And he was saying: Jesus, remember me when thou shouldest come in thy kingdom.'
23:43 And he said: Verily I say to thee, that to-day thou shalt be with me in the Paradise.'
23:44 And it was now (the) sixth hour, and darkness happened upon all (the) earth until (the) ninth hour.
23:45 And the sun being about to fail, the veil of the temple was rent in its midst.
23:46 And Jesus, having called with a great voice, said: 'My Father, I give my spirit into thy hands:' and having said this, he gave (up) the spirit.
23:47 And the centurion, having seen that which happened, was glorifying God, saying: Really was this man righteous.'
23:48 And all the multitudes who came upon this sight, having seen the things which happened, returned striking their breast.
23:49 And all his acquaintance were standing afar off, and women also, who walked after him from Galilee, seeing these (things).
23:50 And behold, a man, his name being Joseph, being a councillor, being a good man and righteous.
23:51 This (man) was not agreeing in their counsel and their deed. He was of AriMatthewheas, a city of the Jews, (one) who was looking for the kingdom of God.
23:52 This (man), having come to Pilate, asked (for) the body of Jesus.
23:53 And having brought him down, he wrapped him in a linen cloth, and laid him in a sepulchre, which he hewed (in rock), in (which) they laid not yet any one: and he rolled a great stone against (the) door of the sepulchre.
23:54 And it was a day of Preparation. And (the) beginning (lit. early) of (the) sabbath had happened.
23:55 And the women who came with him from Galilee, having walked after him, saw the sepulchre, and the manner in which his body was laid.
23:56 And having returned, they prepared spices and ointments: and (during) the sabbath indeed they rested according to the commandment.
24:1 On (the) first (lit. one) of the sabbaths, very early, they came to the sepulchre, having brought the spices, which they prepared.
24:2 And they found the stone having been rolled outside of the sepulchre.
24:3 And having entered, they found not (the) body of (the) Lord Jesus.
24:4 And it came to pass (as they are) being perplexed concerning this, behold, two men stood above them in dazzling raiment.
24:5 And having been in fear, and bowing their face to (the) earth, they said to them: Wherefore seek ye for the living with the dead?
24:6 He is not here, but he rose. Remember, as he spake to you, yet being in Galilee,
24:7 saying: "(The) Son of (the) man must be given into (the) hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and rise on the third day."
24:8 And they remembered his words,
24:9 and having returned from the sepulchre, they told all these (things) to the eleven, and all the rest.
24:10 And it was Mary the Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary of James, :and (the) rest who were with them, who were saying these (things) to the apostles.
24:11 And these words appeared before them as idle talk, and they were believing them not.
24:12 But Peter rose, he ran to the sepulchre; and having gazed in, he saw the garments alone, and went to his house, wondering at that which happened.
24:13 And behold, two of them were walking on that day, going to a village distant from Jerusalem about sixty stadia, its name being Emmaûs.
24:14 And they were speaking to one another concerning all these (things) which happened.
24:15 And it came to pass, (that as they are) speaking and questioning (lit. seeking), Jesus also himself approached them, he walked with them.
24:16 But their eyes were held (imperf. so as) not to know him.
24:17 And he said to them: What are these words, which ye say with one another, (as ye are) walking?' And they stood, being saddened.
24:18 And one, his name being Kleopas, answered, he said to him: Thou alone art in Jerusalem, and thou knewest not the things which happened in it in these days?'
24:19 And he said to them: What are (they)?' And they said to him: The things which happened to Jesus the Nazarene, who was a man--(a) prophet, being powerful in (the) work and (the) word before God and all the people;
24:20 and how the chief priests and the rulers gave him to judgement of (the) death, and they crucified him.
24:21 But we hoped that this (man) will redeem Israel. But beside all these (things), this is his third day since these (things) happened.
24:22 But beside, some women also of us made us wonder. Having gone to the sepulchre early;
24:23 and having not found his body, they came, saying: "We saw a vision of angels, who say of him that he is alive.
24:24 And some of us went to the sepulchre, they found as the women also said: but him they saw not."'
24:25 And he said to them: O [the] senseless, and slow in [their] heart to believe all things which the prophets spake.
24:26 Was it not (imperf.) laid (down) that Christ should suffer these (pains), and enter his glory?'
24:27 And having begun from Moses and all the prophets, he was interpreting to them what were the things which were in all the scriptures concerning him.
24:28 And they approached to the village, to which they were to go: and he made as going further (in) walking.
24:29 And they were laying hold on him violently, saying: Stay with us: because (it is) evening, and now the day declined.' And he came in that he might stay with them.
24:30 And it came to pass, (that) having sat down to meat with them, having taken the bread, he blessed it, and having broken it, he was giving to them.
24:31 And they--their eyes opened, and they knew him; and he disappeared from them.
24:32 And they said to one another Was not our heart burning in us, as he is speaking to us in the road, manifesting the scriptures to us?'
24:33 And they rose in that hour, they returned to Jerusalem; and they found the eleven assembled, and them who were with them,
24:34 saying: `Really the Lord rose, and manifested himself to Simon.'
24:35 And they were speaking of the things which were (done) in the road, and how he appeared to them in the breaking of the bread.
24:36 And (as they are) speaking of these (things), Jesus himself stood in their midst, and said to them: 'The peace to you.'
24:37 But they having been troubled, and having been in fear, were thinking that they saw (lit. see) a spirit.
24:38 And he said to them: Wherefore are ye troubled, and wherefore come thoughts upon your hearts?
24:39 See my hands and my feet, that (it) is I: handle me, and see; because there is not spirit having flesh and bone, according as ye see me having.'
24:40 And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his feet.
24:41 And (as they are) yet unbelieving for (lit. from [the]) joy, and wondering, he said to them: 'Have ye something to eat here?'
24:42 And they gave to him part of a boiled fish, and a honey-comb.
24:43 And having taken (it) before them, he ate.
24:44 And he said to them: 'These were my words which I said to you, being yet with you; that all things which are written in (the) law of Moses, and the prophets, and the psalms, concerning me, must be fulfilled.'
24:45 Then he opened their heart to make them understand the scriptures; and he said to them:
24:46 It was written thus for Christ to suffer, and rise from the dead on the third day;
24:47 and repentance be preached in his name for (the) forgiveness of sins in all the nations. Having begun from Jerusalem,
24:48 ye bear witness of these (things).
24:49 And I will send the promise of my Father upon you: but sit ye in the city, until ye receive power from (the) height.'
24:50 And he brought them out unto Bethany: and having lifted his hands up, he blessed them.
24:51 And it came to pass in his blessing them, he separated away from them, and was (imperf.) taken up to (the) heaven.
24:52 And they having worshipped him, returned to Jerusalem with great joy:
24:53 and they were (imperf.) always in the temple blessing God.
24:54 