1:2 In (the) beginning was the Word, and the Word was (imperf.) with God, and God (indef. art.) was the Word:
1:3 this (one) [who?] was (imperf.) from beginning with God:
1:4 all things became through him; and without him did not anything become of (lit. in) that which became:
1:5 (the) life was that [which] is in him. And (the) life was (the) light of [the] men:
1:6 and the light gave light in the darkness, and the darkness did not apprehend it (lit. him).
1:7 There was (lit. became) a man sent from (lit. through) God, his name being John:
1:8 this (one) came for a witness, that he might bear witness of the light, that all might believe through him.
1:9 He was not the light, but (came) that he might bear witness of the light.
1:10 There was becoming the true light--that which giveth light to every man who cometh to the world.
1:11 He was being in the world, and the world became through him, and the world did not know him.
1:12 He came to them who were his own, and they who were his own received him not to them:
1:13 but they who received him to them--he gave authority to them to become (lit. do) sons of God (without the usual weak article)--them who believe his name.
1:14 And they were not of blood, nor were they of (the) wish of flesh, nor were they of (the) wish of man, but they were born of God (weak definite article).
1:15 And the word became (lit. did) flesh (indef. art.), and abode (lit. became) among us, and we saw his glory, as (the) glory of an only Son of his Father, full of grace and truth.
1:16 John beareth witness concerning him, and crieth out, saying: This (is) he, concerning whom I said, that he who cometh after me had precedence of me, because he was prior to me indeed.'
1:17 Because we all received from his fulness, and grace in exchange for grace.
1:18 Because the law was given through Moses, but the grace and the truth became through Jesus Christ.
1:19 God no one ever saw: the only-begotten God (without article), who is in the bosom of his Father, he spake.
1:20 And this is the witness of John, when the Jews sent to him from Jerusalem priests and Levites, that they might ask him: Who (art) thou?
1:21 And he confessed, he denied not, and he confessed: I am not Christ.'
1:22 And they asked him: Art thou Elias?' he said: 'Nay." Art thou the prophet?' he answered: 'Nay.'
1:23 They said then to him: 'Who (art) thou? that we may give answer (lit. find (the) question) to them who sent us: what sayest thou concerning thyself? '
1:24 He said: I am the voice which crieth out in (the) desert: "Make straight the road of the Lord, as said Esaias the prophet."'
1:25 And they had been sent from the Pharisees:
1:26 and they asked him, saying to him: Wherefore baptisest thou, if thou art not Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet?'
1:27 John answered them, saying: 'I baptise you in water: there standeth in your midst he whom ye know not:
1:28 he who cometh after me: he of whom I am not worthy that I may unloose a latchet of his shoe.'
1:29 These (things) happened in Bêthania beyond the Jordan, the place in which John was baptising.
1:30 And on the (lit. his) morrow he saw Jesus coming to him, and he said: 'Lo, the Lamb of God who will take away (the) sin of the world.
1:31 This is he concerning whom I said, that there cometh after me a man who hath precedence of me, because he is prior to me indeed.
1:32 And I was knowing him not; but that he might appear to Israel, therefore I came to baptise in water.'
1:33 And John bare witness, saying: I saw the Spirit coming down upon him as a dove from (the) heaven; he stayed upon him.
1:34 And I was knowing him not; but he who sent me to baptise in water, he said to me: "He upon whom thou seest the Spirit coming down and staying upon him, this is he who will baptise in (the, lit. a) Holy Spirit."
1:35 And I saw, and bare witness, that this is (the) Son of God.'
1:36 And on the (lit. his) morrow again John was standing, and two of his disciples;
1:37 and having looked at Jesus walking, he said: 'Lo, the Lamb of God!'
1:38 And the two disciples of his heard him speaking, and they walked after Jesus.
1:39 And Jesus having turned himself, and having seen them walking after him, said to them: 'For what sought ye?' And they said to him: 'Rabbi,' which they interpret, Teacher, 'where art thou abiding?'
1:40 And he said to them: Come and see: ' they came then and saw where he is abiding; and they abode with him that day: and it was (the) tenth hour.
1:41 And Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard from John, and walked after him.
1:42 And this (man) found first his brother Simon, and said to him: 'We found Mesias: whose interpretation is Christ.'
1:43 This (man) brought him to Jesus: and Jesus having looked at him, said to him: Thou art Simon (the) son of John: thou shalt be called "Kepha,"' which they interpret Peter.'
1:44 And on the (lit. his) morrow he wished to come to Galilee; and he found Philip. and said to him: Walk after me:'
1:45 and Philip was a man of Bêthsaida, from (the) city of Andrew and Peter.
1:46 And Philip found Nathanael, and said to him: Him, concerning whom Moses wrote in the law and the prophets, we found; it (lit. who) is Jesus (the) son of Joseph, the (man) from Nazareth.'
1:47 And Nathanael said to him: 'Is it possible that [a] good may be from Nazareth?' Philip said to him: 'Come and see.'
1:48 And Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said concerning him: Behold, truly [lo], an Israelite; there is not guile in him.'
1:49 Nathanael said to him: Where knewest thou me?' Jesus answered and said to him: Before that Philip called thee, thou being under the fig-tree, I saw thee.'
1:50 Nathanael answered him, he said to him: Rabbi, thou art (the) Son of God, thou art (the) King of Israel.'
1:51 Jesus answered, he said to him: 'Because I said to thee, that I saw thee under the fig-tree, believest thou? greater (things) than these thou shalt see.'
1:52 And he said: Verily, verily, I say to you, that ye shall see (the) heaven opened, and the angels of God going up and coming down towards (the) Son of (the) man.'
2:1 And on the third day there was a marriage in (the) Cana of Galilee; and (the) mother of Jesus was there:
2:2 and Jesus also and his disciples were invited to the marriage.
2:3 And the wine having failed, (the) mother of Jesus said to him: They have not wine.'
2:4 And Jesus said to her: What (bast) thou with me, thou Woman? mine hour cometh not yet.'
2:5 And his mother said to the servants (lit. deacons, also ver. 9): That which he will say to you, do.'
2:6 Now were (imperf.) set there six stone waterpots, according to (the) cleansing of the Jews, holding two or three firkins apiece.
2:7 Jesus said to them: Fill the waterpots with water:' and they filled them up to the brim.
2:8 He said to them: 'Draw out now, and bring to the ruler-of-the-feast:' and they brought.
2:9 And when the ruler-of-the-feast tasted the water made wine, and was not knowing whence it is; but the servants were knowing, they who filled the water. Then the ruler-of-the-feast called the bridegroom,
2:10 he said to him: 'All men set the good wine first, and if they should drink freely, they bring that which is worse: but thou kept the good wine until now.'
2:11 This is the first sign which Jesus did in (the) Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed.
2:12 After this he came into Kapharnaûm, he and his mother, and his brothers, and his disciples: and he stayed there not many days:
2:13 and (the) feast of theo Jews was approaching, and Jesus came up to Jerusalem.
2:14 And he found in the temple them who sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers sitting.
2:15 And he made a scourge of cords, he cast them all out of the temple, the sheep and the oxen, and he poured out the change of the changers, and overturned their tables:
2:16 and he said to them who sold doves: 'Take away these from here (lit. this): make not (the) house of my Father a house of merchandise.'
2:17 His disciples remembered that it is written: (The) zeal of thy house will eat me.'
2:18 The Jews answered, they said to him: What sign wilt thou show to us, because thou doest these (things)?'
2:19 Jesus answered, he said to them: Pull down this temple, and I will make it stand in three days.'
2:20 The Jews said: They spent (lit. did) forty-six years building this temple, and wilt thou make it stand in three days?'
2:21 But he was speaking concerning the temple of his body.
2:22 When, then, he rose from the dead, his disciples remembered that he was saying this, and they believed the scripture and the word which Jesus said.
2:23 Now he being in Jerusalem in (the) feast of the passover, many believed his name, seeing the signs which he was doing.
2:24 But Jesus was not trusting himself to them, because that he was knowing all (men);
2:25 and had not (imperf.) need that any one should bear witness to him about [a] man; for he was knowing what is in [the] men.
3:1 Now there was a man of the Pharisees, his name being Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
3:2 This (man) came to Jesus by night, and said to him: Rabbi, we know that thou camest from God, as a teacher: for it is not possible for any one to do these signs which thou doest, unless God be with him.'
3:3 And Jesus answered, he said to him: Verily, verily, I say to thee, that unless a man be born another time, it is not possible for him to see the kingdom of God.'
3:4 Nicodemus said to him: How is it possible that a man should be born another time after his being old? Is it possible for him to go into (the) womb of his mother (the) second time and be born?'
3:5 Jesus answered and said: Verily, verily, I say to thee, that unless any one be born of [a] water and the (lit. a) Spirit, it is not possible for him to come into the kingdom of God.
3:6 That which is born (lit. the birth) of (the) flesh is flesh: that which is born (lit. the birth) of the Spirit is spirit.
3:7 Wonder not because I said to thee, that ye must be born another time.
3:8 The wind (lit. spirit) bloweth whither it (lit. he, masc. again) willeth, and thou hearest its voice, but thou knowest not from where it is coining, and to where it (is) going: this is as every one who is born of the Spirit.'
3:9 Nicodemus answered and said to him: How is it possible that these (things) should be?'
3:10 Jesus answered and said to him: 'Thou art (the) scribe of Israel, and thou knowest not these (things)?
3:11 Verily, verily, I say to thee, that we speak that which we know, and we bear witness to that which we see, and our witness ye receive not.
3:12 If I said things of (the) earth to you, (and) ye believed not, how, if I should say things of (the) heaven to you, believe ye?
3:13 And no one went up to (the) heaven except him who came down from (the) heaven, who is (the) Son of (the) man, he who is in (the) heaven.
3:14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in (the) desert, thus must (the) Son of (the) man be lifted up:
3:15 that every one who believeth him (so throughout) may receive the eternal life.
3:16 For thus God loved the world, so that he gave his only Son, that every one who believeth him might not perish, but receive eternal life.
3:17 For God sent not his Son to the world, that he might judge the world, but that the world might be saved through him.
3:18 He who believeth him will not be judged: but he who believeth not him hath been judged, because he believed not (the) name of the only begotten Son of God.
3:19 This is the judgement, that the light came to the world, and [the] men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their works were (imperf.) evil.
3:20 For every one who doeth the evil hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, that his works may not be convicted, that they are evil.
3:21 But he who doeth the truth cometh to the light, that his works may appear, that he did them in God.'
3:22 And after these (things) Jesus came and his disciples to (the) land of Judea; and he was (imperf.) there with them baptising.
3:23 And John also was baptising in Enôn by Salim, because there was much water there: and they were coining, and were being baptised.
3:24 For John was not yet cast into (the) prison.
3:25 A questioning then happened among (lit. from) the disciples of John with the Jews concerning cleansing.
3:26 And they came to John, they said to him: Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond the Jordan, he of whom thou bearest witness, behold this (man) baptiseth, and all come to him.'
3:27 John answered and said: It is not possible that a man should receive anything of himself, unless it was given him from (the) heaven.
3:28 Ye bear witness to me, that I said to you, that I am not Christ, but that I was sent before that (one).
3:29 He who hath the bride he is the bridegroom: but (the) friend of the bridegroom is he who standeth, and, hearing him with joy, rejoiceth because of (the) voice of the bridegroom. This then is my own joy, it was fulfilled.
3:30 That (one) then must grow (greater), but I must be humiliated.
3:31 He who cometh from above is above all: the (one) of (the) earth is of (the) earth, and speaketh of (the) earth. He who cometh from (the) heaven is above all.
3:32 That which he saw and which he heard, to this he beareth witness, and his witness no one receiveth.
3:33 He who will receive his witness, [this] sealed, that God is true.
3:34 For he whom God sent, (is he) who speaketh the words of God: for God was not giving the Spirit in measure.
3:35 The Father loveth (the) Son, and gave all things into his hands.
3:36 He who believeth the Son hath eternal life. But he who is disobedient to the Son shall not see (the) life, but (the) anger of God shall abide upon him.'
4:1 When then Jesus knew that the Pharisees heard that Jesus made him many disciples and baptiseth (more) than John,
4:2 although Jesus himself was not baptising, but it was his disciples,
4:3 he left Judea, and went again to Galilee:
4:4 and it was necessary for him to pass through (the) Samaria.
4:5 He came then to a city of (the) Samaria called 'Sychar,' being near to the field which Jacob gave to Joseph his son.
4:6 And a fountain of water of Jacob was (imperf.) there. Jesus then having been wearied from the road of walking, sat thus at (lit. upon) the fountain; it was the sixth hour.
4:7 A woman then came from (the) Samaria to fill water: Jesus said to her: Give to me that I may drink.'
4:8 And his disciples had gone to the city that they might buy victuals for them.
4:9 The Samaritan woman said to him: How dost thou, a Jew, ask from me to drink, I (being) a Samaritan woman?' for the Jews mingle not with the Samaritans.
4:10 Jesus answered and said to her: `If thou knewest (imperf.) the gift of God, and who saith to thee: "Give to me that I may drink," thou wouldest ask him, and he would give to thee living water.'
4:11 The woman said to him: Lord, thou hast not even a thing to draw with, and the well is deep: whence then (art) thou having the living water?
4:12 Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave to us this well, and he himself drank of it, and his sons, and his cattle?'
4:13 Jesus answered, he said to her: Every one who will drink of the water, that which I will give to him, shall never thirst.
4:14 But the water, which I will give to him, shall be in him a fountain of water springing up to eternal life.'
4:15 The woman said to him: My Lord, give to me this water, that I may not thirst any more, nor come here to fill water.'
4:16 Jesus said to her: Go, call thy husband, and come here.'
4:17 The woman answered and said: I have not husband.' Jesus said to her: Well saidst thou, that I have not husband:
4:18 for thou tookest five husbands; and he who is with thee now is not thy husband; this is true which thou saidst.'
4:19 The woman said to him: My Lord, I see that thou (art) a prophet.
4:20 Our fathers worshipped upon this mountain; but ye say, that the place of worship in Jerusalem is the place in which it is lawful to worship.'
4:21 Jesus said to her: Woman, trust me, that an hour cometh, when neither upon this mountain nor in Jerusalem will they (be) worshipping the Father.
4:22 Ye worship that which ye know not: and we worship that which we know, because the salvation (is) of the Jews.
4:23 But an hour cometh, which now is, when the true worshippers will (be) worshipping the Father in spirit and truth: for the Father sought for such (to be) them who worship him.
4:24 God is spirit: and they who will worship him, ought to worship him in spirit and truth.'
4:25 The woman said to him: 'We know that Mesias cometh, who is called "Christ;" if he should come, he will shew to us all things.'
4:26 Jesus said to her: 'I who speak to thee am (he).'
4:27 And upon (lit. in) this his disciples came, and they were wondering that he speaketh to a woman; no one however said to him: For what soughtest thou?' or, Wherefore speakest thou to her?'
4:28 The woman then left her waterpot, and went to the city, and said to the men:
4:29 Come, see this man, who said to me all things which I did. Is this Christ?'
4:30 And they were coming from the city, and were coming to him.
4:31 His disciples were beseeching him *between them and him, saying: Rabbi, rise, eat.'
4:32 And he said to them: I have food to eat, which ye know not.'
4:33 His disciples then were saying to one another: Did not some one bring to him (aught) to eat?'
4:34 Jesus said to them: My own food is, that I may do (the) wish of him who sent me, and finish his work.
4:35 Say ye not, that yet four months (and) cometh the harvest? lo, I say to you: "Lift up your eyes, and see the fields (lit. countries), that they were white for (the) reaping them.
4:36 Already he who will reap will receive his reward, and will gather fruit to eternal life: that he who soweth may rejoice together with him who reapeth.
4:37 For in this true is the word, that one soweth, and another reapeth.
4:38 I sent you to reap that for which ye toiled not: others toiled, and ye went into their toil."'
4:39 And from that city many of the Samaritans believed him, because of (the) word of the woman bearing witness, that he said all things which I did.
4:40 When then the Samaritans came to him, they besought him that he would stay with them: and he stayed there two days.
4:41 And many more also believed because of his word.
4:42 They were saying then to the woman: `No longer because of thy speech we believe: for we ourselves heard (him), and we know truly that this is the Saviour of the world.'
4:43 And after the two days he came from there to Galilee.
4:44 For Jesus himself bare witness, that there is not a prophet honoured in the city which is his own.
4:45 When then he came to Galilee, the Galileans received him to them, having seen all things which he did in Jerusalem in (the) feast; for they also had come to (the) feast.
4:46 He came again to (the) Cana of Galilee, the place in which he caused the water to become wine. There was a king's-officer, having a son sick in Kapharnaum.
4:47 This (man) heard that Jesus came from Judea to Galilee: he went to him. and was beseeching him that he would come down, and cure his son; for he was about to die.
4:48 Jesus then said to him: Unless ye see signs and wonders, ye believe not.'
4:49 The king's-officer said to him: 'My Lord, come down before my child die.'
4:50 Jesus said to him: Go, thy son liveth:' and the man believed the word which Jesus said to him, and he walked (away).
4:51 (As he is) now coming down, lo, his servants met him, saying: Thy son liveth.'
4:52 And he was asking of them for the hour in which he was relieved: they said to him, that in the seventh hour of yesterday the fever left him.
4:53 His father then knew, that it was that hour (in) which Jesus said to him: Thy son liveth:' and he believed, and his whole house.
4:54 This is the second sign which Jesus did, having come from Judea to Galilee.
5:1 After these (things) was (the) feast of the Jews; and Jesus came up to Jerusalem.
5:2 Now in Jerusalem by (lit. upon) the sheep (gate) there was a pool, which is called in Hebrew Bethsaida,' having five porches:
5:3 and in these were lying the multitudes of them who were sick, blind, and lame, and some withered. And it came to pass, (that as they were) looking for a moving of the water,
5:4 there was an angel (who) came down every hour in the pool, and moved the water. And any (lit. every) one (who) shall come down first after the moving of the water shall be healed of every sickness which (may) be his.
5:5 And there was a man there, having been (lit. done) thirty-eight years in his sickness.
5:6 And Jesus having seen this (man) lying (lit. sleeping), and having known that he had been (lit. did) much time (in that state), [and] said to him: Wishest thou to be cured?'' He who was sick answered him, he said:
5:7 My Lord, I have not (a) man, that, if the water 'should be disturbed, he might put (lit. throw) me into the pool: but as I (am) coming, another getteth (lit. doeth) before me down.'
5:8 Jesus said to him: Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.'
5:9 And immediately the man was cured, and he took up his bed, he walked: (the) sabbath was that day.
5:10 The Jews then were saying to him whom he healed: 'It is (the) sabbath; and it is not lawful for thee to take up thy bed.'
5:11 But he said to them: He who caused me to be cured, he said to me, "Take up thy bed, go."'
5:12 And they asked him, saying: Who is the man who said to thee, "Take up thy bed, and walk?"'
5:13 But he who was cured was not knowing who it is: and Jesus had come forth, a multitude being in that place.
5:14 And after these (things) Jesus found him in the temple, and said to him: 'Lo, thou wast cured; sin not any more, lest greater evil happen to thee.'
5:15 The man then went, and he said to the Jews, that Jesus caused me to be cured.
5:16 Therefore, then, the Jews were persecuting Jesus; because he was doing these (things) on (the) sabbath.
5:17 And Jesus said to them: 'Until now my Father worketh, and I also work.'
5:18 Therefore, then, the Jews were seeking for him the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the sabbath, but he was saying, that God is my Father, making himself equal with God.
5:19 And Jesus answered and said to them: 'Verily, verily, I say to you, that it is not possible that (the) Son should do anything of himself, unless he see the Father doing it. For the things which the Father doeth, these likewise (lit. again) the Son also doeth.
5:20 For the Father loveth (the) Son, and will show to him all things which he doeth; and greater works than these will he shew to him, that ye may wonder.
5:21 For as the Father raiseth the dead, and maketh them live, thus again the Son also maketh live them whom he wisheth.
5:22 For the Father will not judge any one, but he gave all the judgement to the Son;
5:23 that all might honour the Son as they honour the Father. He who honoureth not the Son, honoureth not [again] the Father also who sent him.
5:24 Verily, verily, I say to you, that he who heareth my word, and believeth him who sent me, hath eternal life, and will not come to (the) judgement, but removeth from (the) death into (the) life.
5:25 Verily, verily, I say to you, that an hour cometh, which now is, when the dead will hear (the) voice of (the) Son of God, and they who will hear shall live.
5:26 For as there is life being in the Father, thus he gave to the Son also that life should be in him:
5:27 and he gave authority to him to execute judgement, because (he) is a son of man.
5:28 Wonder not at this; because an hour cometh, when all who are in the sepulchres shall hear his voice,
5:29 and shall come forth; they who did the good (plur.) to a resurrection of life, and they who did the evil (plur.) to a resurrection of judgement.
5:30 It is not possible that I should do anything of myself; as I hear, I judge: and my own judgement is true, because I seek not for my wish, but (the) wish of him who sent me.
5:31 If I should bear witness concerning myself, my witness is not true.
5:32 Another beareth witness concerning me; and I know that his witness is true which he bare concerning me.
5:33 Ye sent to John, and he bare witness to (the) truth.
5:34 But I was not receiving witness from [the] men: yet I say these (things) that ye might be saved.
5:35 That (man), he was the lamp which was kindled, and which gave light; and ye were willing (lit. wished) to be gladdened for an hour in his light.
5:36 But I have witness greater than that of John: for the works which my Father gave to me, that I might finish them, the works themselves which I do, bear witness about me that the Father sent me.
5:37 And the Father who sent me, himself beareth witness concerning me. Neither heard ye ever his voice, nor saw his form.
5:38 And his word is not in you, because him whom he sent ye believed not.
5:39 Search in the scriptures, of which ye think that there is eternal life being in them; and they bear witness concerning me;
5:40 and ye wish not to come to me, that life might be to you.
5:41 I will not receive glory from man.
5:42 But I knew you, that the love of God is not in you.
5:43 I came in (the) name of my Father, and ye receive me not; and if another should come in his own name, ye will receive him.
5:44 How is it possible for you to believe, receiving glory from one another, and (the) glory from the one alone, ye seek not for?
5:45 Think ye that I will accuse you to the Father? there is (one) who will accuse you: Moses, in whom ye hoped.
5:46 For if ye believed (imperf.) Moses, ye would believe me also, for he wrote concerning me.
5:47 If ye believe not the writings of that (man), how believe ye my words?'
6:1 After these (things) Jesus went across the sea of Galilee of Tiberiados.
6:2 And a great multitude was walking after him, because they were seeing the signs which he was doing among them who are sick.
6:3 Jesus went up on the mountain, and he was sitting there with his disciples.
6:4 And the passover, (the) feast of the Jews, had approached.
6:5 Jesus then having lifted up his eyes, and having seen that there is a great multitude come to him, said to Philip: 'Where are we to find bread to buy, that these may eat?'
6:6 And this he said tempting him; for he was knowing what he was intending to do.
6:7 Philip answered him: Two hundred staters of bread will not suffice them, that they may take a little for each.'
6:8 One of his disciples, who is Andrew, (the) brother of Simon Peter, said to:
6:9 There is a child here having five barley loaves and two fishes: but how far (lit. whither) will these go (lit. reach) for these multitudes?'
6:10 And Jesus said: Let the men sit down to meat.' Now there was much grass in that place. The men then sat down to meat upon the grass; (in) their number making five thousand.
6:11 Jesus then took the loaves, and having given thanks, he gave to them who sat at meat: thus again of the fishes also, all that which they wished.
6:12 When then they were satisfied, he said to his disciples: Gather the fragments which remained over, that there shall not be loss of them.'
6:13 They gathered the (fragments) which remained over, and they filled twelve baskets with (ft) fragments of the five barley loaves which remained over to them who ate.
6:14 When then the men saw the signs which Jesus did, they were saying, that truly this is the prophet who cometh to the world.
6:15 And Jesus having seen that they intend to come to take him by force, to make him king, withdrew upon the mountain himself alone.
6:16 And evening having come, his disciples came down to the sea;
6:17 and having entered into the ship, they were coming across the sea to Kapharnaum. And (the) dusk had now come, and Jesus had not yet come to them.
6:18 And the sea was being (lit. coming) disturbed (lit. awake), a great wind blowing.
6:19 Having then been distant about twenty-five stadia or thirty, they saw Jesus walking upon the sea, and drawing himself near to the ship, and they feared.
6:20 But he said to them: I am (he), fear not.'
6:21 They were wishing then to take (lit. place) him into the ship with them, and immediately the ship came to the shore to the land to which they were to go.
6:22 And on the (lit. his) morrow the multitude which was standing on the other side (lit. across) of the sea, saw (plur.) that there was (lit. is) not there another ship except one, and that Jesus entered not into the ship with his disciples, but his disciples had gone alone.
6:23 Other ships came from Tiberiados near the place in which they ate the bread, the Lord having given thanks over it.
6:24 When then the multitudes saw that Jesus (was) not there, nor his disciples, they themselves entered into the ships, and they came to Kapharnaum, seeking for Jesus.
6:25 And having found him across the sea, they said to him: Rabbi, when camest thou here
6:26 Jesus answered them and said: Verily, verily, I say to you, that ye sought for me not because ye saw signs, but because ye ate of the loaves and were satisfied.
6:27 Work, not the food which will perish, but the food which will abide to eternal life, that which (the) Son of (the) man will give to you; for this (one) God the Father sealed.'
6:28 They said then to him: What shall (lit. will) we do, that we may work the works of God?'
6:29 Jesus answered, he said to them: This is the work of God, that ye believe him whom he sent.'
6:30 They said to him then: What sign doest thou, that we may see and believe thee? what work doest thou?
6:31 Our fathers ate the manna in (the) desert, according as it is written: "Bread from (the) heaven he gave to them to eat."'
6:32 Jesus said to them: Verily, verily, I say to you, that Moses gave not to you the bread from (the) heaven; but my Father (is he) who will give to you the true bread from (the) heaven.
6:33 For the bread of God is he who cometh down from (the) heaven, and (is) giving (the) life to the world.'
6:34 They said to him: 'Lord, give to us this bread always.'
6:35 Jesus said to them: 'I am the bread of (the) life: he who comoth to me shall not hunger, and he who believeth me shall not thirst for ever.
6:36 But I said (it) to you, and ye saw me, and ye believe not.
6:37 Every one (lit. all that) whom my Father gave to me will come to me, and he who will come to me I shall not cast out.
6:38 Because I came down from (the) heaven, not that I might do my will, but the (lit. his) will of him who sent me.
6:39 This is (the) wish of him who sent me, that of all (lit. all that) whom he gave to me I should not lose any of them, but should raise him in the last day.
6:40 For this is (the) wish of my Father, that every one (lit. all that) who seeth the Son, and believeth him, should be having eternal life, and that I should raise him in the last day.'
6:41 The Jews then were murmuring concerning him, because he said, that I am the bread which came down from (the) heaven.
6:42 And they were saying: Is this not Jesus (the) son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how saith he now, that I came down from (the) heaven?'
6:43 Jesus answered, he said to them: Murmur not with one another.
6:44 It is not possible that any should come to me, unless the Father who sent me draw him to me, and I raise him in the last day.
6:45 It is written in the prophets, that they shall be all the taught of God: every one (lit. all that) who heard of my Father, and learned (lit. known), will come to me.
6:46 Not that any one saw the Father, except him who is from God, this (one) saw the Father.
6:47 Verily, verily, I say to you, that he who believeth me hath eternal life.
6:48 I am the bread of (the) life.
6:49 Your fathers ate the manna in (the) desert and died.
6:50 And this is the bread which cometh down from (the) heaven, that he who will eat of it should not die.
6:51 I am the living bread, that which (or, he who) came down from (the) heaven: he who will eat of this bread shall live for ever; and the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for (the) life of the world.'
6:52 The Jews then contended with one another, saying: How is it possible that this (man) should give his flesh to us to eat? '
6:53 Jesus said to them: 'Verily, verily, I say to you, that unless ye eat (the) flesh of (the) Son of (the) man, and drink his blood, ye have not life in you.
6:54 He who eateth my flesh, and who drinketh my blood, hath eternal life, and I will raise him in the last day.
6:55 For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.
6:56 He who eateth my flesh, and who drinketh my blood, will abide in me, and I also will abide in him.
6:57 As my Father, who liveth, sent me, and I also live because of the Father; so (lit. and) he who eateth me, also shall live because of me.
6:58 This is the bread which came down from (the) heaven: not as the fathers who ate, and died; he who will eat this bread shall live for ever.'
6:59 These (things) he said, teaching in their synagogue in Kapharnaum.
6:60 Many then of his disciples having heard, said: This word is hard, and who will be able to hear it?'
6:61 But Jesus having seen in himself, that his disciples murmured concerning this, said to them: 'Doth this offend you?
6:62 (What) if ye should see (the) Son of (the) man going up to the place in which he was being at first?
6:63 The Spirit maketh live: the flesh profiteth not anything. The words which I said to you are spirit and are life.
6:64 But there are some of you (who) believe not. For Jesus was knowing from (the) beginning who were they who believe not, and who was to deliver him (up).
6:65 And he was saying to them: Therefore I said to you, that it is not possible that any one should come to me unless it were given to him of the Father.'
6:66 Therefore many of his disciples fled back, and were walking with him no longer.
6:67 Jesus then said to the twelve: Wish ye also to go?'
6:68 Simon Peter answered him: Lord, to whom are we to go? for words of eternal life thou hast.
6:69 And we knew and believed that thou art Christ, the holy one (lit. he who is holy) of God.'
6:70 Jesus answered, he said: Chose not I you as (lit. under) the twelve, and one of you is for a devil?'
6:71 Now he was saying (it) of (lit, for) Judas Simon the Iscariot; for this (man) was intending to deliver him (up), being one of the twelve.
7:1 And after these (things) Jesus was walking in Galilee; for he was not wishing to walk in Judea, because the Jews were seeking for him to kill him.
7:2 Now (the) feast of the Jews, the feast-of-tabernacles, was approaching.
7:3 His brothers then said to him: 'Remove from here (lit. this), and go to Judea, that thy disciples may see thy works which thou doest.
7:4 For no one worketh in secret, and seeketh for himself to be manifested (lit. in manifest): if thou wilt do these (things) manifest thyself to the world.'
7:5 For neither were his brothers also believing him.
7:6 Jesus then said to them: My time cometh not yet; but your time is prepared always.
7:7 It is not possible that the world hate you; but me it hateth, because I bear witness concerning it, that its works are evil.
7:8 And go ye up to (the) feast: and I will not come up to the feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled.'
7:9 And having said these (things), he (is) in Galilee.
7:10 But when his brothers went up to (the) feast, then he also came up not manifestly but as in secret.
7:11 The Jews then were seeking for him in (the) feast, and they were saying: Where. is that (man)?'
7:12 And there was a great murmuring in the multitude concerning him: some indeed were saying: 'He is good;' and others were saying: No, but he led the multitude astray.'
7:13 No one however spake concerning him manifestly, because of (the) fear of the Jews.
7:14 But now the feast having been half over, Jesus came up to the temple, and was teaching.
7:15 The Jews then were wondering, saying: How knoweth this (man) writing, he was not taught?
7:16 Jesus answered them, and said: 'My teaching is not mine.
7:17 He who will do the wish of him who sent me, shall know my teaching, whether it is of God, or (if) I speak from myself.
7:18 He who speaketh from himself, sought for his own glory: but he who seeketh for (the) glory of him who sent him, this (one) is true, and there is not unrighteousness in him.
7:19 Did not Moses give to you the law, and there is not any among you doing the law? wherefore seek ye for me to kill me? '
7:20 And the multitude answered: There is a demon with thee: who seeketh for thee to kill thee?'
7:21 Jesus answered, he said to them: 'One work I did, and ye all wonder.
7:22 Therefore Moses gave to you the circumcision; not that the circumcision is of Moses, but it is of the fathers, and ye circumcise a man on (the) sabbath.
7:23 If a man is to receive the circumcision on (the) sabbath, that the law of Moses shall not be broken; wherefore are ye angry with me, because I caused a man to be wholly cured on (the) sabbath?
7:24 Judge not according to appearance (lit. face), but judge with righteous judgement.'
7:25 Some then of them of Jerusalem were saying: 'Is not this he whom they seek for to kill him?
7:26 Lo, he speaketh openly, and they say nothing to him? Did indeed the rulers know truly that this is Christ?
7:27 But we know this (man), from where (he) is: but if Christ should come, no one will know from where (he) is.'
7:28 Jesus then cried out in the temple, teaching and saying: Ye know me, and ye know from where I came. And I came not from myself, but he who sent me is true; he whom ye know not.
7:29 And I know him; because I am of him, and it is he who sent me.'
7:30 They were seeking then to apprehend him, and no one laid (lit. brought) his hands upon him, because his hour had not yet come.
7:31 Many then of the multitude believed him, and they were saying: 'If Christ should come, will he do more indeed than these signs which this (man) did?'
7:32 The Pharisees heard the multitudes murmuring these (things) concerning him; and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers that they might apprehend him.
7:33 Jesus then said: Yet a little time I am with you, and I will go to him who sent me.
7:34 Ye seek for me, and ye will not find me; and (the) place to which I will go, ye will not be able to come to it.'
7:35 The Jews then said to one another: Whither will this (man) go, and we will not find him? will he go to the scattered among (lit. of) the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
7:36 What is this word which he said: "Ye will seek for me, and ye will not find me; and the place to which I will go, it is not possible for you to come to it?"'
7:37 Now in the last day of the great feast Jesus stood, and cried out, saying: He who thirsteth, let him come to me, and drink.
7:38 He who believeth me, according as the scripture said: "Rivers of water of life will flow from his belly."'
7:39 But this he said concerning the Spirit, which they who believe him were to receive: for (the) Spirit had not yet come; because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
7:40 And some of the multitude having heard these words, were saying: Truly this is the Prophet.'
7:41 And others were saying: `This is Christ:' but others were saying: 'Is Christ coming from Galilee?
7:42 Said not the scripture, that (he) is from (the) seed of David, and that Christ is coming from Bethlehem, the village where David was (imperf.)?'
7:43 A division then happened in the multitude because of him.
7:44 And some among them were wishing to apprehend him; but no one could lay (lit. bring) his hands upon him.
7:45 The officers then came to the chief priests and the Pharisees; and those said to them: 'Wherefore brought ye him not?'
7:46 The officers answered, saying: 'Never man spake thus.'
7:47 And the Pharisees answered them, sayingWent ye also astray?
7:48 Did any of the rulers believe him, or of the Pharisees?
7:49 But this multitude who know not the law are under (the) curse.'
7:50 Nicodemus said to them, he who came to Jesus (at) first by night, being one of them
7:51 Will our law judge the man, unless it hear him first, and know what he doeth?
7:52 They answered him, saying 'Art thou also from Galilee? 'Search and see, that thereis not (a) prophet to rise from Galilee.'
7:53 And they went each to his place.
8:1 And Jesus went to the mountain of the Olives.
8:2 Then he came in the morning to the temple, and the multitudes came to him; and he sat to teachthem.
8:3 And the chief priests and the Pharisees brought to him a woman: they found her in adultery; and they made her stand in (the) midst,
8:4 and said to him: 'Teacher, this woman we found in adultery.
8:5 And (the) law of Moses commanded to stone her; but what sayest thou?'
8:6 And this they said tempting him, that they might find pretext against (lit. upon) him. But Jesus bent down hiseyes, he wrote with his finger upon the earth.
8:7 But they having delayed for his answer, he lifted his head, he said to them:Who among you (is) without sin, let him stone her first with a stone.'
8:8 Then he bent down his head, and wrote upon the earth.
8:9 Having heard this from him, [and] they understood his reproof. They began to come forth each (of them), until had come forth the elders and all of them (lit. their multitude); and left was Jesus alone with the woman who was (imperf.) set in (the) midst.
8:10 Jesus lifted up his head, he said to her O woman, where were they who judged thee? there is not one judging thee.'
8:11 She said to him: 'I see not one, my Lord.' Said Jesus to her: 'Neither (am) I judging thee: go, Henceforth return not to sin any more.'
8:12 Again Jesus spake to them, saying: 'I am (the) light of the world, he who will walk after me, shall not walk in the darkness, but shall receive (the) light of (the) life.'
8:13 The Pharisees then said to him: Thou thyself bearest witness about thyself; thy witness is not true.'
8:14 Jesus answered and said to them: 'Even if I should bear witness about myself, true is my witness, because I know whence I came, and whither I am to go. But ye know not whence I came, or whither I am to go.
8:15 Ye judged according to flesh; and I judge not any one.
8:16 And if I should judge, my judgement is true, because I am not alone, but I and he who sent me, the Father.
8:17 And it is written indeed again in your law, that (the) witness of two men is true.
8:18 I bear witness about myself, and the Father who sent me beareth witness about me.'
8:19 They were saying then: 'Where was thy Father?' Jesus answered: 'Ye know neither me, nor even my Father: if ye knew (imperf.) me, ye would know also my Father.'
8:20 These words he spake in the treasury, teaching in the temple; and no one could lay hold on him, because his hour had not yet come.
8:21 Again Jesus said to them: 'I will go, and ye will seek for me, and ye will not find me. And ye will die in your sins, and the place to which I will go, it is not possible for you to come to it.'
8:22 The Jews then were saying: Is he about to kill himself, because he saith, that the place to which I will go ye will not be able to come to it?'
8:23 And he was saying to them: 'Ye are of them who are beneath; and I am from above: ye are of the world; and I am not of this world.
8:24 I said then to you, that ye will die in your sins: for unless ye believe that I am (he), ye will die in your sins.'
8:25 They were saying then to him: Who (art) thou?' Jesus said to them: At the beginning I also told (lit. made (the) word also with) you.
8:26 I have many things to say concerning you, and to judge. But he who sent me is true, and the things which I heard from him these I also speak in the world.'
8:27 They knew not that he was speaking to them concerning the Father.
8:28 Jesus said to them: If ye should lift up (the) Son of (the) man, then ye shall know that I am (he); and I do not anything from myself; but according as the Father taught me, these (things) I speak.
8:29 And he who sent me is with me; and he left me not alone, because I do the things which please him always.'
8:30 (As he is) saying these (things), many believed him.
8:31 Jesus then was saying to the Jews who believed him: 'If ye should stay in my word, truly ye (will be) my disciples;
8:32 and ye shall know (the) truth, and (the) truth shall make you free.'
8:33 They answered, saying to him: We (are) of (the) seed of Abraam, and we served not any one ever, how sayest thou, that ye shall be made free?'
8:34 Jesus answered them: 'Verily, verily, I say to you, that every one who doeth (the) sin, is a servant of (the) sin.
8:35 And the servant stayeth not in the house for ever: but the son stayeth for ever.
8:36 If then the Son should make you free, ye will really be made free.
8:37 I know that ye (are) of (the) seed of Abraam, but ye seek for me to kill me, because my word is not in you.
8:38 The things then which I saw from my Father, these I speak; and the things which ye heard from your father ye do.'
8:39 They answered, they said to him: Our father (is) Abraam.' Jesus said to them: 'If ye were (the) sons of Abraam, the works of Abraam ye would do.
8:40 But now ye seek for me to kill me, a man saying (the) truth to you, which I heard from God: this did not Abraam.
8:41 Ye do the works of your father.' They said to him: 'We (were) not begotten (lit. generations) of (the) fornication: one (lit. a) Father alone we have, (even) God.'
8:42 Jesus said to them: If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I came from God, and I came: for I came not of myself, but he sent me.
8:43 Wherefore ye know not my speech, because it is not possible for you to hear my word.
8:44 Ye are from your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye wish to do: that (one) was a murderer from (the) beginning, and stood not in (the) truth ever, because there is not truth in him. If the false (one) should speak, he speaketh from the things which are his own, because (he) is false, and his father also.
8:45 But I say (the) truth to you, (and) ye believe me not.
8:46 Which of you will convict me concerning sin? If the truth I say to you, wherefore believe ye me not?
8:47 He who is (lit. the) from God heareth the words of God: therefore ye hear not, because ye are not from God.'
8:48 The Jews answered and said to him: Well said we, that thou (art) a Samaritan, and there is a demon with thee.'
8:49 Jesus answered and said: There is not a demon with me; but I honour my Father; and ye despise me.
8:50 But I was not seeking for mine own glory, there is he who seeketh and who judgeth.
8:51 Verily, verily, I say to you, that if any one should keep my word, he shall never see (the) death.'
8:52 The Jews said: Now we know (lit.? knew) that there is a demon with thee. Abraam died, and the prophets also; and thou sayest: "He who will keep my word, shall never taste (the) death."
8:53 Art thou greater than our father Abraam, who died, and the prophets also died? whom madest thou thyself?'
8:54 Jesus answered, saying: If I should glorify myself, my glory is nothing: my Father is he who will glorify me. He (of) whom ye say, that (he) is our God.
8:55 And ye knew him not: but I know him. And if I should say that I know him not, I shall be like to you, false: but I know him, and I keep his word
8:56 .Abraam your father was (imperf.) glad, wishing to see a day of mine; and he saw, he rejoiced.'
8:57 The Jews said to him: Thou hast (lit. doest) not yet fifty years, and sawest thou Abraam?'
8:58 Jesus said to them: Verily, verily, I say to you, that before Abraam was, I am.'
8:59 They took up stones then, that they might cast upon him: but Jesus hid himself, he came from the temple, and he passed by, he was walking in their midst, and he was passing by.
9:1 And passing, he saw a man blind from birth.
9:2 And his disciples asked him, saying: Rabbi, who sinned? this (man) is it, or his parents is it, that he was born being blind?'
9:3 Jesus answered: Neither this (man) sinned, nor his parents; but that the works of God might appear in him.
9:4 We must work the works of him who sent us while it is the day; and the night cometh, when it is not possible that any one work.
9:5 While I am in the world, I am (the) light of the world.'
9:6 Having said these (things), he cast spittle down, and he made clay from the spittle, and he anointed (the) eyes of the blind from birth.
9:7 And he said to him: Go, wash thy face in the pool of the Siloam,' which they interpret he who was sent.' He went then, he washed his face, and he came seeing.
9:8 His neighbours then, and they who knew him at first, that he was one begging alms, were saying: 'Is this not he who was sitting, begging alms?'
9:9 Some indeed were saying that it is he; and others were saying: Nay, but he was like him.' And he was saying: I am (he).'
9:10 They were saying then to him: How were thine eyes opened?'
9:11 That (man) answered, he said: The man who is called "Jesus," he made clay, he anointed my eyes, and he said to me: "Go, wash thy face in the Siloam." I wont then, I washed my face, I saw.'
9:12 They said to him: Where also was that man?' He said: I know not.'
9:13 They then brought to the Pharisees him who was (imperf.) once blind.
9:14 Now it was (the) sabbath (on) which Jesus made the clay, and caused his eyes to be opened.
9:15 Again then the Pharisees were asking him: How sawest thou?' and he said to them: Clay he put upon mine eyes, and I washed myself, I saw.'
9:16 Some of the Pharisees then were saying: 'This man is not from God, because he keepeth not the sabbath.' But others were saying: 'How is it possible that a sinful man should do such signs? ' and a division was happening among them.
9:17 Again then they said to the blind man: What sayest thou concerning him, because he opened thine eyes? ' And he said: He is a prophet.'
9:18 The Jews trusted him not, that he was (imperf.) blind, and saw, until they called his parents,
9:19 and asked them, saying: Is this your son whom ye say that he was born (lit. we bare him) being blind? how then saw he now?'
9:20 His parents answered, and said: We know that this is our son, and that he was (lit. we) born being blind.
9:21 How then he saw now, we know not: or who opened his eyes, we know not: ask him; he himself has age also to speak concerning himself.'
9:22 These (things) said his parents, since they were fearing the Jews: for the Jews had settled, that if any one should confess that (he) is Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.
9:23 Therefore his parents said: 'He has age also; ask him.'
9:24 They called then the man (the) second time, this (one) who was (imperf.) blind, and they said to him: Glorify God: we know that this man is a sinner.'
9:25 He who was (imperf.) blind answered, saying: 'If (he) is a sinner, I know not: but one (thing) I know, that I was (imperf.) blind, but now I see.'
9:26 They said to him What did he to thee? How opened he thine eyes?'
9:27 He answered them: told (lit. said) you already, and ye heard not. What again wish ye to hear? wish ye also to become disciples to him?'
9:28 And they railed at him, saying: Thou (art) a disciple of that (man): but we are disciples of Moses.
9:29 We know that God spake to Moses, but this (man) we know not from where (he) is.'
9:30 The man answered, he said to them: This indeed is the wonder, that ye know not from where he is, and he opened mine eyes.
9:31 We know that God heareth not sinners, but if any one is a worshipper of God, and (is) doing his wish; this (one) he heareth.
9:32 Since the beginning of the world (lit. from (the) age) we heard not, that any one opened (the) eyes of a (man) blind from birth.
9:33 If this (man) is not of God, he would not be able to do anything.'
9:34 They answered and said to him: Thou wast begotten (lit. art a generation) altogether in (the) sin; and wilt thou teach us?' And they cast him out.
9:35 And Jesus heard that they cast him out; and having found him, said: 'Believest thou (the) Son of God? '
9:36 He answered, he said: Who is he, my Lord, that I may believe him?'
9:37 Jesus said to him: Thou seest him, and it is he who speaketh to thee.'
9:38 And he said: I believe, my Lord:' and he worshipped him.
9:39 And Jesus said: I came for judgement of the world, that they who are blind may see; and they who see may become blind.'
9:40 Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard, and they said to him: Are we blind also?'
9:41 Jesus said to them: If ye were blind, ye had not sin; but now ye say: "We see:" and your sin abideth.
10:1 Verily, verily, I say to you, that he who cometh not in through the entrance to the fold of the sheep, but (is) coming up some other way, that one is a thief and a robber.
10:2 But he who cometh in through the entrance, this is a shepherd of the sheep.
10:3 To this (one) the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice; and he calleth his sheep according to their names, and he bringeth them out.
10:4 And if he should bring out all them which are his own, he walketh before them, and the sheep walk after him, because they know his voice.
10:5 And they walk not after the stranger, but they shall flee from him, because they know not (the) voice of the stranger.'
10:6 This proverb Jesus said to them: but they knew not wherefore he spake to them.
10:7 Again, Jesus said to them: 'Verily, verily, I say to you, that I am the door of the sheep.
10:8 All who came before me are robbers and are thieves; but the sheep hearkened not to them.
10:9 I am the door of the sheep: he who will come in through me shall be saved; and he shall come in, and he shall come out, and shall find a pasture.
10:10 And the thief cometh not except haply that he may steal, and slay, and destroy; I came that life might be to them, and that abundance might be to them.
10:11 I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd giveth his life (lit. soul) for his sheep.
10:12 But the hireling, and (he) who is not a shepherd, he whose own the sheep are not, if he should see the wolf coming, he fleeth and leaveth the sheep; and the wolf snatcheth them and scattereth them.
10:13 Because (he) is a hireling, and he careth not for the sheep.
10:14 I am the good' shepherd, I know them who are mine, and they who are mine know me.
10:15 According as my Father knew me, I also know the Father; and I will lay (down) my life (lit. soul) for my sheep.
10:16 I have other sheep, who are not of this fold; I must bring the others, and they shall hear my voice, and they shall be one flock, one shepherd.
10:17 Therefore my Father loveth me, because I lay (down) my life (lit. soul), that I may take it again.
10:18 No one taketh it away from me, but I (am he) who lay it down of myself: I have authority to lay it (down); I have authority to take it again: this is the commandment which I took from my Father.'
10:19 A division then happened among the Jews because of these words.
10:20 And many then of them were saying: There is a demon with him, and he is mad: wherefore hear ye him?'
10:21 And others were saying: These words are not the (words) of a man having (lit. being) a demon with him: is it possible for a demon to open (the) eyes of blind men?'
10:22 The (lit. a) Dedication happened at that time in Jerusalem: it was (the) winter.
10:23 And Jesus was walking in the temple under the porch of Solomon.
10:24 The Jews then surrounded him, and they said to him: How long dost thou hold us in suspense? if thou art Christ, say to us openly.'
10:25 Jesus answered them: I said to you, and ye believe not: the works which I do in (the) name of my Father, they bear witness about me.
10:26 But ye believe me not, because ye (are) not of my sheep.
10:27 My own sheep hear my voice, and walk after me.
10:28 And I also will give to them eternal life; and they shall not perish for ever; and no one shall be able to snatch them from my hand.
10:29 That which my Father gave to me is greater than all; and there is not any one (who) will be able to snatch them from (the) hand of my Father.
10:30 I and my Father are one.'
10:31 The Jews then took up stones that they might cast upon him.
10:32 Jesus answered them, saying: Many good works I shewed to you from my Father, for which work then will ye stone me?'
10:33 The Jews answered him: For a good work we will stone thee not, but for blasphemy, because thou, a man thyself, makest thee God.'
10:34 Jesus answered and said: it not written in your law: "I said, that ye (are) gods?"
10:35 If he called (lit. said) them "god," to whom (the) word of God came, and it is not possible that the scripture should be broken,
10:36 (of) him whom the Father hallowed, and sent to the world ye say, that thou blasphemedst, because I said, that I am (the) Son of God.
10:37 If I do not the works of my Father believe me not.
10:38 But if I do them, even if ye should not believe me, believe the works, that ye may learn and know that I am in my Father, and my Father in me.'
10:39 Again they were seeking for him to apprehend him; and he fled from their hands;
10:40 and went again across the Jordan, the place in which John was baptising at first, and he abode there.
10:41 And many came to him, and they were saying: John indeed did not any sign: all things which he said concerning this (man) are true.'
10:42 And many believed him there.
11:1 Now there was one sick, namely, Lazarus of Bethany, of (the) village of Mary and Martha her sister.
11:2 And this was Mary who anointed the Lord with the ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was (imperf.) sick.
11:3 His sisters then sent to him, saying: Lord, lo, he whom thou lovest is sick.'
11:4 But Jesus having heard, said: This disease is not a disease of (the) death, but for (the) glory of God; that (the) Son of God may be glorified through it.'
11:5 Now Jesus was loving Martha and Mary her sister and Lazarus.
11:6 Then therefore having heard that he is sick, he abode in the place in which he was (imperf.) two days.
11:7 After this he said to his disciples: Let us go to Judea again.'
11:8 His disciples said to him: Rabbi, (just) now the Jews were seeking for thee to stone thee, and thou wilt go again thither.'
11:9 Jesus answered: Are there not twelve hours in the day? he who walketh in the day stumbleth not, for (lit. and) he saw (the) light of the world.
11:10 But he who walketh in the night stumbleth, because the light (is) not in him.'
11:11 Having said these (things), after this (plur.) he said to them: Lazarus our friend slept, but I shall go, that I may raise him.'
11:12 The disciples said to him: Lord, if he slept, he shall rise.'
11:13 Now Jesus said (it) concerning the sleep of his death. But they were thinking that he said (it) concerning the sleep of the slumber.
11:14 Then Jesus said to them openly: Lazarus died.
11:15 And I rejoice because of you, that ye may believe, that I was (imperf.) not there; but let us go unto him.'
11:16 Thomas then, who is called Didymus,' said to his fellow disciples: Let us also go, that we may die with him.'
11:17 Jesus then having come, found him, having been four days (lit. being his four) in the sepulchre.
11:18 Now Bethany was (imperf.) near to Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia.
11:19 And many of the Jews had come to Mary and Martha, concerning their brother.
11:20 Martha then having heard that Jesus cometh, rose, she met him; but Mary was sitting in the house.
11:21 Martha then said to Jesus: My Lord, if thou hadst (imperf.) been here, my brother would not have died.
11:22 But now then I know, that that which thou wilt ask from God, God will give to thee.'
11:23 Jesus said to her: 'Thy brother will rise.'
11:24 Martha, said to him: I know that he will rise in the resurrection, in the last day.'
11:25 Jesus said to her: I am the resurrection and the life: he who believeth me, even if he should die, shall live:
11:26 and every one who liveth and who believeth me shall not die for ever: thou believest this.'
11:27 She said to him: My Lord, I believe that thou art Christ, (the) Son of God, who cometh to the world.'
11:28 And having said this, she went, she called Mary her sister secretly, having said to her: 'The Teacher is here (lit. this), and calleth thee.'
11:29 And she having heard, rose quickly, and she came to him.
11:30 For Jesus had not yet come up to (the) village; but he was (imperf.) then in the place in which Martha came to him.
11:31 The Jews then who were (imperf.) with her within the house comforting her, having seen Mary, that she rose quickly, and came out, walked after her, thinking to themselves, that she is about to depart to the sepulchre, that she may weep there.
11:32 Mary then having come to the place in which Jesus was (imperf.); and having seen him, threw herself down at his feet, saying: My Lord, if thou hadst (imperf.) been here, my brother would not have died.'
11:33 Jesus then having seen her weeping, and the Jews also who came with her weeping, was pained in the spirit, and was troubled.
11:34 And he said to them: 'Where laid ye him?' They said to him: Lord, come and see.'
11:35 And his eyes shed (lit. gave) tears.
11:36 The Jews then were saying: 'See how he loveth him.'
11:37 But some of them said: Was it not possible for this (man), who opened (the) eyes of the blind from birth, that he should not permit this other (one) to die?'
11:38 Jesus then had compassion in himself, he came to the sepulchre. Now it was a cave, and there was a great stone put (lit. given) against it.
11:39 Jesus said to them: Take (away) this stone [there]:' Martha, (the) sister of him who died, said to him: 'Lord, he stinketh, for (it is) his four(th day) to-day.'
11:40 Jesus said to her: Said I not to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou wilt see (the) glory of God? '
11:41 They then took away the stone from the mouth of the sepulchre. And Jesus lifted his eyes up, and said: My Father, I give thanks to thee, because thou heardest me.
11:42 And I was knowing that thou hearest me always; but because of this multitude which surrounds me I said (it), that they may believe, that thou sentest me.'
11:43 And having said these (things), he cried out with a great voice: Lazarus, come forth.'
11:44 And he who died came forth, being bound as to his feet and his hands with grave-clothes, and his face bound with a napkin. Jesus said to them: Unloose him, send him away, let him go.'
11:45 Many then of the Jews who came to Mary, having seen the things which he did, believed him.
11:46 But some of them went to the Pharisees, they told to them that which Jesus did.
11:47 The chief priests then and the Pharisees assembled an assembly. and they were saying: `What shall (lit. will) we do? many are the signs which this man doeth.
11:48 If we should permit him thus, all will believe him, and the Romans will come, they will take away our place and our nation.'
11:49 But one of them answered, his name being Kaiapha, being chief priest for that year. He said to them: "Ye know not anything;
11:50 nor reason ye to yourselves, that it is profitable for you, that (one) man alone should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.'
11:51 Now he said not this from himself; but because he was (imperf.) chief priest for that year, he prophesied that Jesus must die for the nation;
11:52 and not for the nation alone, but (must) assemble into one the sons also of God who are scattered.
11:53 From that hour they took counsel that they might kill him.
11:54 And Jesus was not walking any more manifestly in Judea, but he went from there to a country near the desert, to a city called 'Ephrem,' and he abode there with his disciples.
11:55 Now the passover of the Jews was approaching; and many came up to Jerusalem from the country before the passover, that they might hallow themselves.
11:56 The Jews then were seeking for Jesus, saying to one another, standing in the temple What think ye, that he will not come to (the) feast?'
11:57 The chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandment, that if any one should know where he was, he should shew him to them, that they might apprehend him.
12:1 Jesus then six days before the passover (lit. before six days of the passover) came to Bethany, the place in which Lazarus was (imperf.), who died, whom Jesus raised from the dead.
12:2 They made a supper for him in that place, and Martha was ministering, and Lazarus was one of them who sat at meat with him.
12:3 Mary then took a pound of ointment of pistic nard, being of great price, and she anointed (the) feet of Jesus with it, and she wiped them with (the) hair of her head; and the house was filled with (lit. from) the odour of the ointment.
12:4 But one of his disciples, who was (lit. is) Judas (the) Iscariot, who was to deliver him (up), said:
12:5 Wherefore was not this ointment sold for three hundred staters, and they be given to the poor?'
12:6 Now he said this, not because he cared about the poor; but because he was a thief, and having the bag he was carrying the things which he used to throw into it.
12:7 Jesus then said: Permit her that she may keep it to (the) day of my embalming.
12:8 For the poor are with you always, but I am not with you always.'
12:9 And a great multitude of the Jews knew that he is there; and they came not because of Jesus alone, but besides because of Lazarus also, that they might see him whom he raised from the dead.
12:10 But the chief priests took counsel that they might kill Lazarus also;
12:11 because many of the Jews were departing because of him, and were believing Jesus.
12:12 And on the (lit. his) morrow, the great multitude who came to (the) feast, having heard that Jesus cometh up to Jerusalem,
12:13 took branches from palm-trees, and met him, and were crying out, saying: Osanna, blessed is he who cometh in (the) name of the Lord, and (the) king of Israel.'
12:14 And Jesus having found an ass, mounted it, according as it is written:
12:15 Fear not, Daughter of Sion; behold, thy King cometh mounted on a colt (the) foal (]it. son) of an ass.'
12:16 And these (things) his disciples knew not at first: but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that they did these (things) to him.
12:17 The multitude then, which was (imperf.) with him, was bearing witness, that he called Lazarus from the sepulchre, and raised him from the dead.
12:18 Therefore the multitudes were coming forth to him, because they heard that he did this sign.
12:19 The Pharisees then said to one another: We see that we shall (lit. will) not gain anything; lo, the whole world went after (lit. behind) him.'
12:20 Now there were Greeks of them who came up to (the) feast that they might worship.
12:21 These then were coming to Philip the man of Bethsaida of Galilee, and they were beseeching him, saying: Our Lord, we wish to see Jesus.'
12:22 Philip came, he said (it) to Andrew; Andrew again and Philip came, they said (it) to Jesus.
12:23 And Jesus answered, he said to them: 'The hour came that (the) Son of (the) man should be glorified.
12:24 Verily, verily, I say to you, that unless the grain of wheat fall upon the earth and die, it abideth alone: but if it should die, it bringeth forth much fruit.
12:25 He who loveth his life (lit. soul) shall lose it; and he who hateth his life (lit. soul) in this world shall keep it to eternal life.
12:26 He who will minister to me, let him follow me; and (the) place in which I am, there shall be with me my minister; and he who will be minister to me, my Father will honour him.
12:27 Now was my soul troubled; and what shall (lit. will) I say? my Father save me from this hour; but therefore came I to this hour.
12:28 Father, glorify thy Son.' A voice came from (the) heaven, saying: I glorified, again I will glorify.'
12:29 The multitude then, which was standing (by), having heard were saying, that thunder happened. But others were saying, that an angel spake to him.
12:30 Jesus answered and said: This voice happened not because of me, but because of you.
12:31 Now (is the) judgement of this world; now shall (the) ruler of this world be cast out.
12:32 And if I also should be lifted up from (the) earth, I shall draw every one to me.'
12:33 But this he was saying, signifying with what death he will die.
12:34 The multitude answered him, saying: We heard from the law that Christ abideth for ever; and how sayest thou that (the) Sou of (the) man must be lifted up? who is (the) Son of (the) man?
12:35 Jesus said to them: Yet a little time (is) the light among you: walk then in the light, while ye have the light; that the darkness apprehend you not, because he who walketh in the darkness knoweth not whither he went.
12:36 While ye have the light, walk in the light, that ye may become sons of the light.' Jesus having said these (things) went, he hid himself from them.
12:37 But having done so many (lit. these multitudes of) signs before them, they believed him not.
12:38 That (the) word of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he said: Lord, who believed our voice? and to whom was revealed (the) arm of the Lord?'
12:39 Therefore it was not possible for them to believe, and Esaias said again:
12:40 He hardened their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they might not see with their eyes, and understand in their heart, and might return to me, that I might cure them.'
12:41 These (things) said Esaias, because he saw (the) glory of God, and spake concerning him.
12:42 Nevertheless many of the rulers also believed him: but they were not confessing him because of the Pharisees, lest they should be put out of the synagogue:
12:43 for they loved (the) glory of [the] men rather than (the) glory of God.
12:44 And Jesus cried out and said: He who believeth me, believeth not me, but he believed him who sent me.
12:45 And he who seeth me seeth him who sent me.
12:46 I came for a light of the world, that every one who believeth in me might not stay in (the) darkness.
12:47 And he who will hear my words, and will keep them not, I am not (he) who will judge him; for I came not that I might judge the world, but that I might save the world.
12:48 He who denieth me, and who receiveth not my words, hath that which will judge him: the word which I spake, that will judge him in the last day.
12:49 Because I spake not from myself; but he who sent me, he gave commandment to me what I shall (lit. will) say or what I shall (lit. will) speak.
12:50 And I know that his commandment is eternal life; the (things) then which I say, according as my Father said to me, thus I speak.'
13:1 Now before (the) feast of the passover, Jesus having seen that his hour came, that he should remove from this world, and (lit. about to) go to the Father; having loved them who were his own, who were in the world, he (lit. having) loved them until the end.
13:2 And supper having been (ended), the devil had already put (lit. thrown) into (the) heart of him who was to deliver him (up), who was (lit. is) Judas Simon (the) Iscariot.
13:3 And Jesus having seen that the Father gave everything into his hands, and that he came from God, and is to go to God,
13:4 rose from the supper, laid his garments down, and took a towel, he girt himself with it.
13:5 And he poured (lit. threw) water into a bason, and began to wash (the) feet of his disciples, and (is) wiping them with the towel with which he was (imperf.) girt.
13:6 He came then to Simon Peter, about to wash his foot: Peter said to him: Lord, wilt thou wash my foot?'
13:7 Jesus answered and said to him: That whichI do, thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know after these (things).'
13:8 Peter said to him: Thou shalt never wash my foot.' Jesus answered: Verily, verily, I say to thee: Unless I wash thy foot, thou hast not part with me.'
13:9 Simon Peter said to him: My Lord, not only my feet, but also my hands and my head.'
13:10 Jesus said to him: He who was washed hath not need except to wash his foot, but he is altogether clean, and ye also are clean, but not all.'
13:11 For he was knowing who was to deliver him (up); therefore he was saying: Ye are not all clean.'
13:12 When then he (had) washed their feet, he took his garments, and having sat down to meat again, he said to them: Ye know what I did to you.
13:13 Ye call me "Teacher" and "our Lord;" ye say well, for I am (it).
13:14 If then I washed your feet, your Lord and your Teacher, ye also ought to wash the (lit. their) feet of one another.
13:15 For I gave (lit. did) to you a pattern, that according as I did to you, ye also might do to one another.
13:16 Verily, verily, I say to you, that there is not a servant [being] greater than his Lord, nor an apostle [being] greater than he who sent him.
13:17 If ye know these (things), blessed are ye if ye should do them.
13:18 I was not saying (it) concerning you all: for I know them whom I chose, but that the scripture may be fulfilled: "He who eateth my bread with me raised his heel upon me."
13:19 [From] now I say to you before it happen, that if it should happen, ye may believe that I am (he).
13:20 Verily, verily, I say to you, that he who receiveth him whom I will send receiveth me; and he who receiveth me receiveth him who sent me.'
13:21 And Jesus having said these (things), was troubled in the spirit, and bare witness, and said: Verily, verily, I say to you, that one of you will deliver me (up).'
13:22 His disciples then were gazing at one another, they knew not which of them he said it was.
13:23 And one of his disciples was reclining in the bosom of Jesus, whom Jesus was loving.
13:24 Simon Peter then beckoned to this (one), that he might ask him whom he said it was.
13:25 And that disciple having leant upon (the) breast of Jesus said to him: My Lord, who is (it)?'
13:26 Jesus answered, saying: He, to whom I will dip the sop and give it, is he:' and he dipped the sop, and he gave it to Judas Simon (the) Iscariot.
13:27 And after the sop Satan went into him. Jesus then said to him: 'That which thou wilt do, do quickly.'
13:28 Now no one among those who sat at meat knew of this word, wherefore he said (it) to him.
13:29 And some were thinking, that, since Judas was having the bag, [that] perhaps Jesus is saying to him: Buy that of which we shall (lit. will) have need for (the) feast; ' or, that he might give something to the poor.
13:30 That (man) then having received the sop came forth immediately; and it was night.
13:31 When then he came forth, Jesus said: Now (the) Son of (the) man was glorified, and God was glorified in him.
13:32 If God was glorified in him, [and] God will glorify him in himself, and immediately shall glorify him.
13:33 My sons, yet a little I am with you: ye shall seek for me, and according as I said to the Jews, that the place to which I will go, ye will not be able to come to it; so (lit. and) now to you also I say (it).
13:34 A new commandment I give to you, that ye may love one another; according as I loved you, that ye may love one another.
13:35 By this all will know that ye (are) my disciples, if ye should love one another.'
13:36 Peter said to him: Lord, whither art thou to go?' Jesus answered: The place to which I will go, it is not possible for thee to walk after me now (thither), but at (the) end thou shalt [walk].'
13:37 Peter said to him: Wherefore is it not possible for me to walk after thee now? I will lay (down) my life (lit. soul) for thee.'
13:38 Jesus answered him: Wilt thou lay (down) thy life for me? Verily, verily, I say to thee, that a cock shall not crow until thou deniest me three times.
14:1 Let not your heart be troubled; believe God, and believe me also.
14:2 There are many mansions in (the) house of my Father: if there were not, I would have said (it) to you; because I will go and prepare a place for you.
14:3 And if I should go and prepare a place for you, again I shall come, and take you away to me; that in (the) place in which I am, ye also may be the with me.
14:4 And (to the) place to which I shall go, ye know the road.'
14:5 Thomas said to him: `Lord, we know not whither thou art to go, and how is it possible for us to know the road?'
14:6 Jesus said to him: am the road, and the truth, and the life; no one cometh to the Father, unless he come by me.
14:7 If ye know me, ye shall know my Father also; and henceforth ye know him, and ye saw him.'
14:8 Philip said to him: Lord, shew to us the Father, and it is sufficient for us.
14:9 'Jesus said to him: All this time I have been (lit. am) with you, and thou knewest me not, Philip? he who saw me, saw the Father; how sayest thou: "Shew to us the Father?"
14:10 Believest thou not that I am in my Father, and my Father in me? these words which I say to you I was not speaking them by myself, but the Father who abideth in me, he doeth his works.
14:11 Believe me that I am in my Father, and my Father in me, otherwise even because of the works believe me.
14:12 Verily, verily, I say to you, that he who believeth me, the works which I do, he shall do also; and greater than these shall he do, because I will go to the Father.
14:13 And that which ye will ask in my name, I shall do it for you, that the Father may be glorified in (the) Son.
14:14 That which ye will ask in my name, this I will do.
14:15 If ye love me, ye will keep my commandments.
14:16 And I will beseech the Father, and he shall give to you (a) Paraclete, that he may be with you for ever.
14:17 The Spirit of the truth; whom it is not possible for the world to receive, because it seeth him not, nor knoweth him. But ye know him, because he abideth with you, and shall be in you.
14:18 I shall not leave you being orphans; I come to you.
14:19 Yet a little, and the world will no longer see me; but ye see me; because I am alive, [and] ye also shall live.
14:20 In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I also in you.
14:21 He who hath my commandments, and who keepeth them, that (one) loveth me; and him who loveth me my Father shall love, and I shall love him, and I shall manifest myself to him.'
14:22 Judas said to him, not (the) Iscariot: Lord, what happened that thou wilt manifest thyself to us, and not (to) the world?'
14:23 Jesus answered, saying to him: He who loveth me shall keep my word, and my Father shall love him, and we shall come to him, and make our abode in him.
14:24 He who loveth me not, will not keep my words; and the word which ye hear is not mine, but that of the Father who sent me.
14:25 And these (things) I said to you, abiding with you.
14:26 But if the Paraclete should come, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and he will remind you of all things which I said to you.
14:27 I will leave my peace to you, my own peace I will give to you; not as the world giveth, will I give. Let not your heart be troubled, nor be doubtful.
14:28 Ye heard that I said to you, that I will go, and I come to you. If ye loved (imperf.) me, ye would rejoice, because I will go to the Father; because my Father is greater than I.
14:29 And now I said (it) to you before it happeneth, that if it should happen, ye may believe.
14:30 1 will not say many words to you any longer, for (the) ruler of this world cometh; and he hath nothing in me.
14:31 But that the world may know that I love my Father; and according as my Father ordered me, I do thus. Rise, let us go from here.
15:1 I am the true vine; and my Father is the husbandman.
15:2 Every branch which is in me, which will not bring forth fruit he will cut away; and every one (lit. that) which will bring fruit, he will cleanse it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
15:3 Now ye were cleansed because of this word which I spake to you.
15:4 Abide in me, and I also in you. According as the branch--it is not possible that it should bring forth fruit from itself, unless it abide in the vine: thus ye also--it is not possible for you, unless ye abide in me.
15:5 I am the vine; ye are the branches: he who will abide in me, and I also in him, this (one) shall bring forth much fruit: because without me it is not possible for you to do anything.
15:6 Unless any one abide in me, he will be cast out as the branch; and he is withered; and they gather them, and cast them to the fire; and they are burned.
15:7 And if ye should abide in me, and my words abide in you. ask that which ye wish, and it will be clone for you.
15:8 In this is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, and that ye be to me disciples.
15:9 As my Father loved me, I also loved you: abide in my love.
15:10 If ye keep my commandments, ye will abide in my love: as I also kept the commandments of my Father, and I abide in his love.
15:11 These (things) I said to you, that my joy may abide in you; and that your joy also may be fulfilled.
15:12 This is my own commandment, that ye love one another, as I loved you.
15:13 No one hath greater than this love, that he (lit. one) should lay (down) his life (lit. soul) for his friend.
15:14 Ye are my friends, if ye should do the things which I order you.
15:15 I will no longer call you "servant;" because the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but you I am to call "my friends;" because all things which I heard from my Father I shewed to you.
15:16 Ye chose not me, but I chose you; and I set you, that ye might go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit might stay. That that which ye will ask from the Father in my name, he might give it to you.
15:17 And these (things) I order you, that ye love one another.
15:18 If the world hate you, know that it first hated me.
15:19 If ye were from the world, the world would love that which is its own. But because ye are not from the world, but I chose you from the world, therefore the world hateth you.
15:20 Remember the word which I spake to you , that there is not a servant who is greater than his lord. If they persecuted me, they shall persecute you also; if they kept my word, they shall keep yours also.
15:21 But all these (things) they will do to you because of my name; because they know not him who sent me.
15:22 If I had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin: but now they have not pretext concerning their sin.
15:23 He who hateth me hateth my Father also.
15:24 If I had not done the works among them which no other did, they had not had sin: but now they saw, and they hated me and my Father also.
15:25 But (this is) that the word might be fulfilled which is written in their law, that they hated me without a cause.
15:26 If the Paraclete should come, whom I will send to you from my Father, the Spirit of the truth, who cometh from the Father, he will bear witness concerning me.
15:27 And ye also bear witness, because ye are with me from (the) first.
16:1 These (things) I said to you, that ye might not be offended,
16:2 if they should put you out of the synagogue. But an hour cometh, that every one, who will kill you, shall (conj.) think that he offered sacrifice to God.
16:3 And these (things) they shall do to you, because they knew not the Father, nor knew they me.
16:4 But these (things) I said to you, that if the hour should come, ye may remember them that I have said them to you; and these (things) I said not to you from (the) beginning, because I was (imperf.) with you.
16:5 But now I will go to him who sent me, and no one of you asketh me, "Whither wilt thou go'?"
16:6 But because I said these (things) to you, (the) grief filled your heart.
16:7 But (the) truth I say to you; it is profitable for you that I go. For unless I go, the Paraclete will not come to you. But if I should go, I will send him to you.
16:8 And if that (one) should come, he shall convict the world concerning (the) sin, and concerning righteousness, and concerning judgement.
16:9 Concerning (the) sin indeed, because they believe me not;
16:10 and concerning righteousness, because I will go to the Father, and ye will see me no longer;
16:11 and concerning judgement, because (the) ruler of this World hath been judged.
16:12 I have yet many things to say to you, but ye will not be able to bear them now.
16:13 Howbeit if that (one), the Spirit of the truth, should come, he shall guide you in all truth. For he is not to speak from himself, but the things which he is to hear he will speak; and the things which come, he shall show to you.
16:14 That (one) will glorify me, because he is to take of that which is mine own, and will show to you.
16:15 All things which my Father hath are mine; therefore I said to you, that he is to take of that which is mine own, and shew to you.
16:16 Yet a little, (and) ye will not see me; and again, yet a little, (and) ye will see me.'
16:17 Some of his disciples said to one another: What is this word which he saith to us, that yet a little, (and) ye will not see me; and again, yet a little, (and) ye will see me; and, because I will go to the Father?'
16:18 They were saying then: 'What is this which he saith, "Yet a little?" we know not what he said.'
16:19 Jesus knew that they were wishing to ask him, and he said to them: 'Ye seek for this word with one another, because I said to you, that yet a little, (and) ye will not see me; and again, yet a little, (and) ye will see ine.
16:20 Verily, verily, I say to you, that ye will weep and mourn, but the world will rejoice; ye will be grieved, but your grief will become to you joy.
16:21 The woman if she should be going to bear is grieved, because her hour came: but if she should bear the son, she remembereth not the tribulation because of the joy, that she bare a man into the world.
16:22 And ye also now indeed shall have grief; again I will see you, and ye will rejoice; and your joy no one will take away from you.
16:23 And in that day ye will ask me not anything. Verily, verily, I say to you, that which ye will ask from the Father in my name, he shall give to you.
16:24 Till now ye asked not yet anything in my name: ask, and ye will receive, that your joy may be complete.
16:25 And these (things) I said to you in proverbs; and an hour cometh, when I will speak to you no longer in proverbs, but openly I will shew to you concerning the Father.
16:26 In that day ye shall ask in my name, and I will not say to you, that I will beseech the Father concerning you.
16:27 For the Father himself also loveth you, because ye loved me, and ye believed that I came from the Father.
16:28 I came from the Father, and I came into the world; again I will leave the world, and I will go to the Father.'
16:29 His disciples said to him: Lo, now thou speakest openly, and thou sayest not any proverb.
16:30 Now we know, that thou knowest all things, and thou past not need for any one to ask thee; in this we believe, that thou camest from God.'
16:31 Jesus answered: 'Now ye believe.
16:32 Lo, an hour cometh, and it came, that ye may be scattered, each one to his place, and may leave me alone, and I am not alone, because my Father is with me.
16:33 These (things) I said to you, that peace might be to you in me: ye have tribulation in the world, but be of good cheer; I conquered the world.'
17:1 These (things) Jesus spake, and having lifted up his eyes to (the) heaven, he said: My Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee.
17:2 As thou gavest to him authority over all flesh, that to every one (lit. that) whom thou gavest to him he should give to them eternal life.
17:3 And this is the eternal life, that they may know thee the one true God alone, and him whom thou sentest, Jesus Christ.
17:4 I glorified thee upon the earth, having finished the work which thou gavest to me, that I might do it.
17:5 And now glorify thou me, my Father, with (apud) thee in the glory which I had (imperf.) at first, before the world was, with thee.
17:6 I manifested thy name to the men whom thou gavest to me from the world: thine they are, and thou gavest them to me, and they kept thy word.
17:7 And now they knew that all things which thou gavest to me are from thee.
17:8 Because the words which thou gavest to me, I gave to them; and they also received them, and they knew truly that I came from thee, and they believed that thou sentest me.
17:9 I pray for them: I was not praying concerning the world, but concerning them whom thou gavest to me, because they are thine.
17:10 And they who are mine are thine; and I was glorified in them.
17:11 And I am no longer in the world; but these, they are in the world, and I come to thee. My Father, the holy (one), keep them in thy name which thou gavest to me, that they may be one as we are.
17:12 When I was (lit. being) with them I was keeping them in thy name which thou gavest me. I kept them, and not any of them perished except (the) son of (the) perdition, that the scripture might be fulfilled.
17:13 But now I am coming to thee, and these (things) I speak in the world, that my joy may be complete in them.
17:14 I gave to them thy word, and the world hated them, because they are not from the world, as I also am not from the world.
17:15 I was not beseeching that thou shouldest take them away from the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.
17:16 They are not from the world, as I also am not from the world.
17:17 Hallow them in the truth; thine own word is the truth.
17:18 According as thou sentest me into the world, I also sent them into the world.
17:19 And I hallow myself for them, that they also may be hallowed in truth.
17:20 And I was not beseeching concerning these alone, but besides for them who believe me through their word;
17:21 that they all may be one, according as, [the] Father, thou art in me, I also in thee; that they also may be in us one; that the world may believe that thou sentest me.
17:22 And the glory which thou gavest to me, I gave to them, that they also may be one, as we also are one:
17:23 that they may be complete (in) one, that the world may know that thou sentest me.
17:24 My Father, they whom (lit. that which) thou gavest to me,-- I wish that (in the) place in which I am, they may be there with me; that they may see my glory, which thou gavest to me; because thou lovedst me before (the) foundation of the world.
17:25 My Father, the righteous (one), though the world knew not thee; I knew thee, and these also knew that thou sentest me.
17:26 And I shewed to them thy name, and I will shew to them, that the love with (lit. in) which thou lovedst me may be in them, and I also in them.'
18:1 Jesus having said these (things) came forth with his disciples across the torrent (lit. stray-water) of the cedar trees, the place in which there is a garden; into this entered Jesus and his disciples.
18:2 And Judas also, who was to deliver him (up), was knowing that place, because many times Jesus assembled thither with his disciples.
18:3 Judas then having received the multitude and officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came thither with lanterns and torches and weapons.
18:4 And Jesus knowing all things which come upon him, came forth, he said to them: For whom sought ye?'
18:5 They answered, they said to him: Jesus of Nazareth.' Jesus said to them: I am (he).' Judas, who was to deliver him up, was standing with them.
18:6 When then he said to them: I am (he),' they fled back, and they fell down.
18:7 Again he asked them: For whom sought ye?' And they said: Jesus of Nazareth.
18:8 'Jesus answered: said to you, that I am (he); if ye sought for me, send these away, let them go;
18:9 that the word might be fulfilled which he said: Them whom thou gavest to me, I lost not any of them.'
18:10 Simon Peter then having a sword drew it, and struck at (the) servant of the chief priest, and cut off his right ear; now (the) name of the servant is Malchos.
18:11 Jesus then said to Peter: Put (lit. throw) the sword into its sheath: the cup which my Father gave to me, shall (lit. will) I not drink it?'
18:12 The multitude then and the Chiliarch and the officers of the Jews laid hold on Jesus, they bound him;
18:13 and they brought him first to Anna; for he was (the) father-in-law to Kaiapha, who was (imperf.) chief priest for that year.
18:14 Now it was this Kaiapha who counselled the Jews, saying, that it is profitable that one man should die for the people.
18:15 And Simon Peter was walking after Jesus, and another disciple: now that disciple was (imperf.) known to the chief priest. And he came in with Jesus to the court of the chief priest.
18:16 Peter was standing outside by the entrance. The disciple then, who was (imperf.) an acquaintance of (lit. to) the chief priest, came, he spake to the porteress, and he brought Peter in.
18:17 The porter-maid said to Peter: Art thou also one of (the) disciples of this man?' and he said: Nay.'
18:18 Nov the servants and the officers were standing (by), having lit a fire for themselves, because it was (the) winter; and they were warming themselves: and Peter also was standing with them, warming himself.
18:19 The chief priest, then asked Jesus concerning his disciples, and concerning his teaching.
18:20 Jesus answered him, saying: 'I spake to the world openly. And I was teaching in the synagogues always, and in the temple, the place to which all the Jews assemble. And I said not any word in secret.
18:21 Wherefore askest thou me? ask them who heard, what I said to them. Behold, these know the things which I said.'
18:22 Jesus having said these (things), one of the officers who stood (by) struck Jesus, saying: Is this (the) manner of answering the chief priest?'
18:23 Jesus answered, he said to him: If evil I spake, bear witness of the evil: but if well, wherefore beatest thou me?'
18:24 Then Anna sent him bound to Kaiapha the chief priest.
18:25 Now Simon Peter was standing, warming himself: they said to him: Art thou also one of his disciples?' and he denied, he said: Nay.'
18:26 One of the servants of the chief priest, being kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, said: Did I not see thee with him in the garden?'
18:27 Again Peter denied; and immediately a cock crew.
18:28 They then brought Jesus from Kaiapha into the Prætorium; and it was early; and they themselves came not into the Prætorium, that they shall not be defiled, until they eat the passover.
18:29 Pilate then came forth to them, and said to them: What accusation bring ye against this man?'
18:30 They answered, they said to him: If this were not a wicked (man), we would not have delivered him to thee.'
18:31 Pilate said to them: Take ye him, judge him according to your law.' The Jews said to him: It is not lawful for us to kill any one:'
18:32 that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he said, signifying with what death he will die.
18:33 Again Pilate came into the Prætorium, and he called Jesus, he said to him: Art thou (the) king of the Jews?'
18:34 Jesus answered and said: Sayest thou this of thyself, or did others say (it) to thee concerning me?'
18:35 Pilate answered, saying: Am I a Jew also? thine own nation and the chief priests, they delivered thee (up): what didst thou?'
18:36 Jesus answered: My kingdom is not of the world: if my kingdom were of this world, my servants (lit. officers) would have fought (lit. given) for me, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not of the world.'
18:37 Pilate then said: (Art) thou a king then?' Jesus answered: 'Thou sayest that I (am) a king. For I was born for this work, and therefore I came into the world for my bearing witness to the truth; all who are of the truth hear my voice.'
18:38 Pilate said to him: What is the truth?' and having said this, again he came forth to the Jews, he said to them: I find not any guilt in this man.
18:39 But your custom is that I should release one to you in the passover, wish ye then that I should release to you (the) king of the Jews?'
18:40 And they all cried out, saying: Release not this (man); but release Barabbas.' Now this Barabbas was a robber.
19:1 Then Pilate took Jesus, he scourged him.
19:2 And the soldiers plaited a crown of thorns, they put (lit. gave) it upon his head, and they arrayed him in a purple garment.
19:3 And they were coming to him, saying: king of the Jews ' and they were striking him.
19:4 Again Pilate came, and said to them: Lo, I will bring him out to you, that ye may know that I find not any guilt in (lit. to) him.'
19:5 Then Jesus came out, wearing the thorn-crown and the purple garment, and Pilate said to them: Behold, the man!'
19:6 When then the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, saying: Crucify him, crucify him.' Pilate said to them: 'Take him yourselves, crucify him, for I find not any guilt attaching (lit. taking) to him.'
19:7 The Jews answered him: We have a law; and according to our law he is worthy of (the) death, because he made himself Son of God.'
19:8 When then Pilate heard this word, he feared the more.
19:9 And he came into the Prætorium, he said to Jesus: 'Whence art thou?' ' But Jesus answered him not.
19:10 Pilate said to him: Wherefore speakest thou not to me? or knowest thou not that I have authority to crucify thee, I have authority again to release thee?'
19:11 Jesus answered: Thou hast not any authority over (lit. into) me, if it had not been given to thee from above; therefore he who gave me to thee hath greater sin.'
19:12 Because of this (lit. therefore) then Pilate was seeking to (lit. for) release him. The Jews then cried out, saying: 'If thou shouldst release this (man), thou (art) not (the) friend of (the) king; for every one who maketh himself king, (is) opposing (the) king.'
19:13 And Pilate having heard these words, brought Jesus forth, and he sat on the judgement-seat in the place which is called the Lithostrôton,' but in Hebrew Gabbatha.'
19:14 Now it was (the) Preparation of the Passover, and it was (the) sixth hour. And Pilate was saying to the Jews: Behold, your king!'
19:15 And they cried out: Take him away, take him away, crucify him.' Pilate said to them: Should I (conj.) crucify your king?' The chief priests answered: We have no king except Kesar.'
19:16 Then, therefore (lit. then), he delivered to them Jesus, that they might crucify him. They took then Jesus.
19:17 And he carrying his cross, came to the place which is called the skull,' but in Hebrew Golgotha;'
19:18 the place in which they crucified him: and they crucified two robbers also with him on this side and this side of him, and Jesus in (the) midst.
19:19 And Pilate wrote a title also, and set it upon the cross. And it was written: Jesus of Nazareth, (the) king of the Jews.'
19:20 And many of the Jews read the title, because the place in which Jesus was crucified was (imperf.) near to the city. And it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, in Greek.
19:21 The chief priests of the Jews were saying then to Pilate: Write not, "(The) king of the Jews," but that he said: "I am (the) king of the Jews." '
19:22 Pilate answered: That which I wrote I wrote.'
19:23 The soldiers then having crucified Jesus, took his garments, they made four portions, and the coat also: now the coat was seamless, woven from above all of it.
19:24 They said then to one another: Let us not rend it, but let us cast lot for it, to which of us it is to belong.' That the scripture might be fulfilled, saying: They divided my garments among them, and they cast lot for my raiment.' These (things) then the soldiers did.
19:25 But there were standing by the cross of Jesus his mother, and (the) sister of his mother, Mary of (lit. that of) Kleopa, and Mary the Magdalene.
19:26 And Jesus having seen his mother, and the disciple whom he was loving, standing (by), said to his mother: thy son!'
19:27 Then he said to the disciple: 'Behold, thy mother!' And from that hour the disciple took her away to his house.
19:28 After these (things), Jesus having seen that now all things were finished, that the scripture might be finished, he said: thirst.'
19:29 And there was a vessel full of vinegar set down; they filled a sponge with vinegar, they placed it upon hyssop, they put (lit. threw) it by his mouth.
19:30 When then Jesus tasted the vinegar, he said: 'It is finished:' and having bent down his head, he delivered (up) the spirit.
19:31 The Jews then, since it was the Preparation, that the bodies might not stay upon the cross on (the) sabbath for great was the day of that sabbath--they besought Pilate, that they might break their legs, and take them away.
19:32 The soldiers then came, and (of) the first indeed they brake his legs; and they brake those of the other who was crucified with him.
19:33 But having come to Jesus, they found him--he was already dead; they brake not his legs.
19:34 But one of the soldiers pierced his side with his spear; and immediately came out water and blood.
19:35 And he who saw bare witness; and true is his witness; and he also, that (one), knoweth that he said truth, that ye might believe.
19:36 For these (things) happened, that the scripture might be fulfilled: A bone of his shall not be broken.'
19:37 And again the scripture saith: They shall see him whom they pierced.'
19:38 And after these (things) came Joseph the man of Arimatheas, he besought Pilate--being himself a disciple of Jesus; but he was (imperf.) in secret (lit. hid) because of (the) fear of the Jews--that he might take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate commanded to give it. He came then and took away the body of Jesus.
19:39 And there came also Nicodemus, who came to Jesus by night at first, having a mixture (of) myrrh and aloe, about a hundred pound.
19:40 They took then the body of Jesus, and wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices, according to the custom of the Jews for embalming.
19:41 Now there was a garden in the place in which he was crucified; and there was a new sepulchre in the garden: no one was ever yet put (lit. thrown) in (it).
19:42 Since the sepulchre was (imperf.) near to them, because that it was the Preparation of the Jews, they laid Jesus in it.
20:1 Now on (the) first (lit. one of the sabbaths, Mary the Magdalene came to the sepulchre early, it being yet dusk [out], and she saw the stone taken away from the mouth of the sepulchre.
20:2 She ran then, she came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved (imperf.), and she said to them: They took away our Lord from the sepulchre, and we know not where they laid him.'
20:3 Peter then came forth and the other disciple, and they were coming to the sepulchre.
20:4 And they were running both together. And the disciple ran before Peter, and came (lit. did) first before (lit. to) him to the sepulchre.
20:5 And he gazed in, he saw the garments laid down; however he entered not.
20:6 And there came also Simon, Peter walking after him, and he went on into the sepulchre, and he saw the garments laid down:
20:7 and the napkin, which was (imperf.) upon his head, was (imperf.) not with the garments, but wrapped (up), laid apart alone.
20:8 Then came in also the other disciple who came first to the sepulchre, and he saw, he believed.
20:9 For they had not yet known the scripture, that he must rise from the dead.
20:10 The disciples went again to their place.
20:11 But Mary was standing outside by the sepulchre weeping: and as she (was) weeping, she looked into the sepulchre:
20:12 she saw two angels sitting in white vesture, one at the head, and one at the foot, in the place in which the body of Jesus was lying.
20:13 And those (angels) said to her: Woman, why weepest thou? ' She said to them: They took away my Lord, and I know not where they laid him.'
20:14 Having said these (things), she turned herself back, she saw Jesus standing, and she was not knowing that it is Jesus.
20:15 Jesus said to her: Woman, wherefore weepest thou? for whom sought thou?' And she, thinking that it is the gardener, said to him: My Lord, if thou carriedst him (away), show to me where thou laidest him, and I will take him away.'
20:16 Jesus said to her: Mariam:' and she turned herself, she said to him in Hebrew: 'Rabbouni,' which is this: 'Teacher.'
20:17 Jesus said to her: Touch me not: for I went not yet up to my Father: but go to my brothers, and say to them, that I will go up to my Father, who is your Father; and my God, who is your God.'
20:18 And Mary the Magdalene came, she told (lit. shewed) to the disciples: I saw the Lord, and these (things) he said to me.'
20:19 And it was evening of that day, (the) first (lit. one) of the sabbaths, and the doors being shut of the place in which the disciples were assembled, because of (the) fear of the Jews, then (he) Jesus came, he stood in their midst, he said to them: (The) peace to you.'
20:20 And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side: the disciples then rejoiced having seen the Lord.
20:21 And he said to them again: (The) peace to you; according as my Father sent me, I also send you.'
20:22 And having said this, he breathed in their face, and said to them: 'Receive to you the (lit. a) Holy Spirit.
20:23 Whose sins ye will forgive [to them], they are forgiven to them; and them which ye will retain, they shall be retained.'
20:24 But Thomas who is called Didymus,' one of the twelve, was (imperf.) not there with them, Jesus having come to them.
20:25 The disciples then were saying to him We saw the Lord.' But he said to them: Unless I see (the) print of the nails in his hands, and put (lit. throw) my finger into (the) print of the nails, and put (lit. throw) my hand into his side, I will not believe.'
20:26 And after eight days again the disciples were assembled within, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came within, the doors being shut, and he stood in their midst, he said to them: (The) peace to you.'
20:27 Then he said to Thomas: 'Reach (lit. give) thy finger hither, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, thrust (lit. throw) it into my side, and be not faithless.'
20:28 Thomas answered and said: My Lord and my God.'
20:29 Jesus said to him: Because thou sawest me, thou believedst: blessed are they who saw not, and believed.'
20:30 Many other signs indeed Jesus did before his disciples, which are not written in this book.
20:31 But these were written, that ye may believe that Jesus Christ is (the) Son of God, and that, believing, eternal life may be to you in his name.
21:1 And after these (things) again Jesus manifested himself to his disciples at the sea of Tiberiados; and he manifested himself thus.
21:2 There were (imperf.) at a place Simon Peter, and Thomas who is called Didymus,' and (the) sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.
21:3 Simon Peter said to them: I will go and catch fish.' They said to him: I We come also with thee;' and having come forth, they entered into the ship; and in that night they caught not any.
21:4 But morning being about to come, Jesus stood on the shore; however the disciples knew not that it was (lit. is) Jesus.
21:5 Jesus then said to them: Children, have ye anything to eat?"They answered: Nay.'
21:6 He said to them: Cast the net on the right of the ship, and ye shall find.' And they cast, and they could not draw it up for (the) abundance of the fishes.
21:7 The disciple whom Jesus loved (imperf.) said to Peter: It is the Lord.' Simon Peter then having heard that it was (lit. is) the Lord, girded himself in his clothing, for he was (imperf.) naked, and threw himself into the sea.
21:8 But the other disciples came in the ship--for they were (imperf.) not distant from the shore, but about two hundred cubits--drawing the net of the fishes.
21:9 And when they came to the land, they looked, they saw a fire laid [down], and fish upon it, and bread.
21:10 Jesus said to them: Bring of the fishes which ye caught now.'
21:11 Simon Peter then came up, and he drew the net up on the land, full of great fish, being a hundred (and) fifty-three in it; and though (lit. being) this number (was) in it, the net was not rent.
21:12 Jesus said to them: Come, eat.' And there was (imperf.) not any of his disciples (who) dare ask him:: Who (art) thou?' knowing that it is the Lord.
21:13 Jesus then came, he took the bread and gave to them, and the fish thus.
21:14 And this is (the) third time that Jesus manifested himself to his disciples, having risen from the dead.
21:15 When then they (had) eaten, Jesus said to Simon Peter:: `Simon, (son) of John, lovest thou me (more) than these?' He said to him: 'Yea, my Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.' He said to him: Feed my lambs.'
21:16 Again he said to him (the) second time: Simon, (son) of John, lovest thou me?' He said to him: Yea, my Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.' He said to him: Feed my sheep.'
21:17 He said to him again (the) third time: Simon, (son) of John, lovest thou me?' Peter was grieved because he said to him (the) third time: Lovest thou me.' And he said to him: 'Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee.' He said to him:' Feed my sheep.
21:18 Verily, verily, I say to thee that, thou being a child, thou girdest thyself, and goest whither thou wiliest; but if thou should be old, thou shalt stretch out thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and they shall take thee away, whither thou willest not.'
21:19 Now having said this, he signified in what death he is to glorify God: and having said this, he said to him: Walk after me.'
21:20 And Peter turned himself, he saw the disciple whom Jesus loved (imperf.), who reclined on his breast at (lit. in) the supper, who said to him: Lord, who will deliver thee (up)?'
21:21 Peter then having seen this (man), said to Jesus: My Lord, and this (man) what (shall) he (do)? '
21:22 Jesus said to him: If I should wish to leave him until I come, what (is it) to thee? but thou follow me.'
21:23 And this word came forth among the brothers, that that disciple will not die, but Jesus said not to him, that he will not die; but if I should wish to leave him until I come, what is it to thee?
21:24 This is the disciple who bare witness of these (things); and he wrote them; and we know that his witness is true.
21:25 And there are many other things again which Jesus did; these, if they had been written one by one, I know that the world would not be able to contain the books which would have been (lit. will be) written.
21:26