1:1 The birth-book of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraam.
1:2 And Abraam begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brothers.
1:3 And Judas begat Phares and Zara from Tamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram.
1:4 And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Nasson; and Nasson begat Salmon.
1:5 And Salmon begat Boes from Rechab; and Boes begat Jubed; and Jubed begat Jesse.
1:6 And Jesse begat David, and David begat Solomon from the wife of Urias.
1:7 And Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asaph.
1:8 And Asaph begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat Ozias.
1:9 And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias.
1:10 And Ezekias begat Manasse; and Manasse begat Amos; and Amos begat Josias.
1:11 And Josias begat Jechonias and his brothers, at the time of the migration to Babylon.
1:12 After the migration to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel.
1:13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud: and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor.
1:14 And Azor begat Sadok; and Sadok begat Achin; and Achin begat Eliud.
1:15 And Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthewthan; and Matthewthan begat Jacob.
1:16 And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, who bare Jesus who is called Christ.
1:17 All the generations from Abraam to David are fourteen generations; and from David to the migration to Babylon fourteen generations; and from the migration to Babylon to Christ fourteen generations.
1:18 The birth of Jesus Christ was thus: Mary his mother having been betrothed to Joseph, before they knew each other she was found with child from the Holy Spirit.
1:19 And Joseph her husband was righteous, and not wishing to make her a public example, he intended to put her away secretly.
1:20 And he having thought about these things, behold an angel of the Lord manifested himself to Joseph in a dream, saying: Joseph, son of David, fear not to take to thee Mary, thy wife: for he whom she will bear is from the Holy Spirit.
1:21 And she shall bear a son; thou shalt call his name "Jesus;" for he will save his people from their sins.'
1:22 And all this happened that it might be fulfilled which, the Lord said by the prophet, saying:
1:23 Behold, the virgin shall conceive, and shall bear a son, they shall call his name "Emmanuel," which 'is interpreted "God with us."'
1:24 And Joseph having risen from the sleep, did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and he took to him Mary his wife.
1:25 And he knew her not until she bare the son; and he called his name Jesus.'
2:1 And Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold Magi came from the east to Jerusalem,
2:2 saying: 'Where is he who is born king of the Jews? for we saw his star in the east, we are come that we may worship him.'
2:3 And king Herod, having heard, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
2:4 And having assembled all the chief-priests and the scribes of the people, he was asking of them 'where will Christ be born?'
2:5 And they said to him: In Bethlehem of Judea: for thus is written by the prophet
2:6 And thou Bethlehem, land of Juda, thou art not little among the princedoms of Juda: for from thee shall come a governor who will rule my people Israel."
2:7 Then Herod called the Magi secretly, he enquired from them about the time of the star which appeared.
2:8 And he sent them to Bethlehem, saying: Go, ask carefully concerning the child. And if ye find him, tell me that I may come also and worship him.'
2:9 And they, having obeyed the king, went. And behold, the star which they saw in the east, was going before them, until it came and stood over the place in which the child was.
2:10 And having seen the star, they rejoiced with very great joy.
2:11 And having come to the house they saw the child with Mary his mother; and having thrown themselves down they worshipped him; and having opened their treasures they offered him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh.
2:12 And having been told in a dream not to return to Herod, by another road they went to their country.
2:13 And they having gone, Behold, and angel of the Lord manifested to Joseph in a dream, saying: 'Arise, take the child and his mother, and flee to Egypt, and be there until I tell thee: for Herod will seek for the child to destroy him.'
2:14 And he arose, he took the child and his mother by night, and went to Egypt.
2:15 And he was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which. the Lord said by the prophet, saying: 'I called my son from Egypt.'
2:16 Then Herod having seen that the Magi mocked him, was very angry, and he sent, he slew every child that was in Bethlehem and in all her boundaries, from two years old and under, according to the time which he enquired from the Magi.
2:17 Then was fulfilled that which he said by Jeremias the prophet, saying:
2:18 A voice was heard in Rama, Rachel weeping for her sons; and would not be comforted, because they are not.
2:19 And Herod having died, behold, an angel of the Lord manifested himself to Joseph in a dream in Egypt, saying:
2:20 Arise, take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel; for they are dead who sought for the life of the child.'
2:21 And he, having arisen, took the child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
2:22 And having heard that Archelaos is king of Judea instead of Herod his father, he feared to go thither; and having been told in a dream, he went to the parts of Galilee.
2:23 And he came, he dwelt in a city called 'Nazareth:' that it might be fulfilled which he said by his prophets: 'He shall be called "the Nazarene." '
3:1 And in those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the desert of Judea,
3:2 saying: 'Repent; for the kingdom of the heavens is come near.
3:3 For this is he of whom, he spake by Esaias the prophet, saying: "The voice of him who crieth in the desert: 'Prepare the road of the Lord, make straight his paths.'
3:4 And he, John, his raiment was of camel's hair, and he was girt with a girdle of skin upon his loins, and his food was locust and honey of the field.
3:5 Then came forth to him the people of Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about the Jordan;
3:6 and were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins
3:7 And having seen a multitude of the Pharisees and the Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them: 'Offspring of vipers, who told you to flee from the anger which cometh?
3:8 Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of repentance;
3:9 and think not in yourselves to say: " We have our father Abraam; " for I say unto you: " God has power to raise up from these stones sons unto Abraam.
3:10 The axe is now at the root of the trees: every tree which will not bring forth good fruit will be cut down, and cast into the fire.
3:11 For I indeed baptize you with water to repentance: but he who cometh after me is stronger than I, whose shoe I am not worthy to carry: he shall baptize you with [the] Holy Spirit and fire.
3:12 And he--his fan in his hand--will cleanse his floor; and will gather his wheat into the garner, but will burn the chaff with fire unquenchable."
3:13 Then came Jesus from Galilee upon the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.
3:14 And John was forbidding him, saying: I have need to be baptized by thee, and thou comest to me.'
3:15 And Jesus answered, he said to him: Permit it now: thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness.' Then he permitted him.
3:16 And having been baptized, Jesus immediately came up from the water; and lo, the heavens opened to him, and he saw a Spirit of God coming down as a dove, coming to him;
3:17 and lo, there was a voice from the heavens, saying: This is my Son, my Beloved in whom I am well pleased.'
4:1 Then Jesus--the Spirit took him away to (the) desert for the devil to tempt him,.
4:2 And having fasted forty days and forty nights, at last he hungered.
4:3 And the tempter came, he said to him: If thou be (the) Son of God, command that these stones become bread.'
4:4 And he answered, he said to him: It is written, that the man was not to live by bread alone, but upon every word which cometh from the mouth of God.'
4:5 Then the devil took him away to the holy city, and made him, stand upon (the) wing of the temple;
4:6 and said to him: If thou be the Son of God, throw thyself down from here: for it is written, that he will order his angels concerning thee, and they shall bear thee upon their hands, lest haply thou dash against a stone thy foot.'
4:7 Jesus answered him: It is written again, that thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.'
4:8 Again, the devil took him away up to a very high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory:
4:9 and said to him: All these I will give thee, if thou shouldst throw thyself down and worship me.'
4:10 Then said Jesus to him: Go, Satan; for it is written, that the Lord thy God is he whom thou shalt worship, and he alone whom thou shalt serve.
4:11 Then the devil left him, and lo, angels came and ministered to him.
4:12 Now having heard that John was delivered (up), he went to Galilee;
4:13 and he left Nazareth; he came, he dwelt in Kapharnaum, which is by (the) sea, in the boundaries of Zabulon and Nephthalim
4:14 That it might be fulfilled which he said by Esaias the prophet, saying:
4:15 (The) land of Zabulon and (the) land of Nephthalim, the road of (the) sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations:
4:16 the people who sit in (the) darkness saw a great light, and upon them who sit in (the) region and (the) shadow of death light sprang up.'
4:17 From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say: Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens approached.'
4:18 And walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon who is called 'Peter,' and Andrew his brother, throwing a net into (the) sea, for they were fishers.
4:19 And he said to them: Come, walk after me, that I may make you fishers, catchers of men.'
4:20 And they immediately left their nets, and walked after him.
4:21 And having passed on from there, he saw two other brothers, James, son of Zebedee, and John his brother, being on the ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets, and he called them.
4:22 And they immediately left the ship and Zebedee their father, they walked after him.
4:23 And Jesus was going about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness which was among the people.
4:24 And his fame went forth in all Syria, and they brought to him all who were afflicted with their sicknesses and their pains in many ways, them with whom were the demons, and them who were epileptic, and them who were paralysed, and he healed them.
4:25 And great multitudes walked after him from Galilee and the ten cities and Jerusalem and Judea and beyond the Jordan.
5:1 And having seen the multitudes he went up upon the mountain; and having sat down his disciples came to him.
5:2 And having opened his mouth he was teaching them, saying:
5:3 Blessed are the poor of spirit, because theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.
5:4 Blessed are they who mourn now, because they will be comforted.
5:5 Blessed are the meek, because they will inherit the earth.
5:6 Blessed are they who hunger and they who thirst after righteousness, because they will be satisfied.
5:7 Blessed are the pitiful, because they will be pitied.
5:8 Blessed are they who are pure in their heart, because they will see God.
5:9 Blessed are the peacemakers, because they will be called "the sons of God."
5:10 Blessed are they who were persecuted because of righteousness, because theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.
5:11 Blessed are ye if they should persecute you and revile you and say all evil at you, speaking falsely against you because of me.
5:12 Rejoice and be glad, because your reward is great in the heavens. For thus they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
5:13 And ye (are the) salt of the earth, but if the salt have lost its savour, with what shall it be salted? it is no longer good for anything, but to be cast out, and trodden upon by men.
5:14 Ye are (the) light of the world: it is not possible that a city be hid, being set upon a mountain;
5:15 nor do they light a lamp and put it under a, measure, but they put it on the lamp-stand, and it gives light to every one who is in the house.
5:16 Thus let your light give light before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in the heavens.
5:17 Think not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets: I came not to destroy them, but to fulfil them.
5:18 For verily I say to you, that until (the) heaven and (the) earth pass away, an iota or a point shall not pass away from the law until all these things be accomplished.
5:19 He, then, who will destroy one of these little commandments, and teach men thus, shall be called "the little in the kingdom of the heavens." But he who will do and teach, this (one) shall be called" great in the kingdom of the heavens."
5:20 For I say to you, that unless your righteousness exceed that of the scribes and the 'Pharisees, ye shall not come into the kingdom of the heavens.
5:21 Ye hear that it was said to them of old time: "Thou shalt not kill; and he who will kill shall be in danger of the judgement."
5:22 But I say to you, that every one who will be angry with his brother without cause shall be in danger of the judgement. He who will say to his brother "Raka" shall be in danger of the council. And he who will say to his brother "[the] fool" shall be in danger of the Geenna of the fire.
5:23 If, then, thou wilt offer up thy gift upon the altar, and remember there that willthere is a quarrel between thee and thy brother
5:24 Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
5:25 Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
5:26 Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.
5:27 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery:
5:28 But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
5:29 And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
5:30 And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
5:31 It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement:
5:32 But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.
5:33 Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths:
5:34 But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God’s throne:
5:35 Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King.
5:36 Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.
5:37 But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.
5:38 Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:
5:39 But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
5:40 And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also.
5:41 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
5:42 Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.
5:43 Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.
5:44 But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;
5:45 That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
5:46 For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?
5:47 And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so?
5:48 Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.
6:1 And give heed to your gift: do it not before [the] men to cause them to see you: (thus) ye have no reward from your Father who is in the heavens.
6:2 If then thou wilt do alms, sound not a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and the market places that men may glorify them. Verily I say to you, that they have already received their reward.
6:3 But thou going to do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth:
6:4 that thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father who seeth in secret shall give to thee.
6:5 And if ye will pray, ye shall not be as the hypocrites; because they love to stand in the synagogues and the corners of the streets and pray, that they may appear to men. Verily I say to you, that they have already received their reward.
6:6 But thou going to pray, go into thy chamber; shut thy door upon thee, and pray to thy Father in secret: and thy Father who seeth in secret shall give to thee.
6:7 And ye going to pray, do not make a multitude of words as the Gentiles. For they think that they will be heard in their multitude of words.
6:8 Be not then like to them: for your Father knoweth the things which ye have need of before ye pray him concerning them.
6:9 Pray ye then thus. Our Father who art in the heavens, hallowed be thy name.
6:10 Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done as in (the) heaven so upon the earth.
6:11 Give us our bread of to-morrow to-day.
6:12 And forgive us our debts as we also forgive our debtors.
6:13 And bring us not into temptation: but save us from the evil.
6:14 For if ye forgive [the] men their trespasses your Father who is in the heavens shall forgive your trespasses.
6:15 But if ye do not forgive [the] men, neither will your Father forgive you your trespasses.
6:16 And if ye fast ye shall not be as the hypocrites, who make sad their face: for they disfigure their faces that they may appear to [the] men (as) fasting. Verily I say to you, that they have already received their reward.
6:17 But thou, fasting, anoint thy head and wash thy face;
6:18 that thou appear not to [the] men (as) fasting, but (to) thy Father who is in secret: and thy Father who seeth in secret shall reward thee.
6:19 Throw not in for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where (the) rust and (the) moth destroy them, and where the thieves break through for them and steal them.
6:20 But throw in for yourselves treasures in (the) heaven, where neither rust nor moth destroy them, and the thieves break not through for them and steal them.
6:21 For the place in which thy treasure is, there shall be thy heart also.
6:22 (The) lamp of the body is the eye: if then thine eye is single, thy whole body shall be shining.
6:23 But if thine eye is evil, thy whole body shall be dark. If then the light which is in thee is darkness, how great the darkness?
6:24 It is not possible that any man should serve two lords: for either (it is) that he hates one, and loves one; or that he accepts one, and despises the other. It is not possible for you to serve God and mamon.
6:25 Therefore I say to you: "Do not take care about your life: viz. what will ye eat or what will ye drink: nor about your body: viz. with what will ye clothe yourselves." Is not the life better than the food, and the body than the raiment?
6:26 Consider the birds of (the) heaven that they sow not, nor reap, nor put into barn; and your Father who is in the heavens feedeth them. Are not ye much better than they?
6:27 And for which of you by taking care is it possible to add (lit. put upon) a cubit to his stature?
6:28 And why take ye care for raiment? consider the flowers of (the) field how they grow, they toil not, nor spin:
6:29 and I say to you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed as one of these.
6:30 And if God thus robes the grass of (the) field (which) to-day is and to-morrow they
6:31 Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
6:32 (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
6:33 But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.
6:34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
7:1 Judge not, that ye may not be judged:
7:2 for ye are to be judged with the judgement which ye will give: and in the measure which ye will measure, it is to be measured to you.
7:3 Wherefore seest thou the mote in thy brother's eye; and the beam which is in thine eye thou considerest it not?'
7:4 Or how wilt thou say to thy brother: "Let me cast the mote from thine eye;" and behold the beam is in thine eye?
7:5 Hypocrite, first cast the beam from thine eye; and then thou shalt see clearly to cast the mote from thy brother's eye.
7:6 Give not the holy to the dogs: nor cast your pearls before the swine, lest haply they trample on them with their feet, and turn and rend you.
7:7 Ask, and it shall be given you. Seek, and ye shall find. Knock, and it shall be opened to you.
7:8 For every one who asketh receiveth; and he who seeketh findeth; and to him who knocketh they open.
7:9 Or what man who is among you, whose son will ask him for a loaf, will he give him a stone?
7:10 Or who will ask him for a fish, will he give him a serpent?
7:11 If then ye being evil, know how to give the good gifts to your sons, how much more then shall your Father which is in the heavens give the good things to those who will ask him?
7:12 And all things which ye wish that men should do to you, do ye also thus to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
7:13 Enter by the narrow gate; because wide is the gate and broad is the road which leadeth to destruction; and many are they who will go in by it.
7:14 Because narrow is the gate and straitened is the road which leadeth to (the) life; and few will find it.
7:15 And beware of the false prophets who come to you in sheep's raiment: but inside of them they are ravening wolves.
7:16 By their fruits ye shall know them. Do they gather grapes off thorns; or do they gather figs off the thistles?
7:17 Thus every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; and the evil tree bringeth forth evil fruit.
7:18 It is not possible for a good tree to produce evil fruit; nor an evil tree to produce good fruit.
7:19 Every tree which will not produce a good fruit will be cut down and cast to the fire.
7:20 So then by their fruits ye shall know them.
7:21 Not every one who saith to me, "Lord, Lord," will come into the kingdom of the heavens: but he who doeth the will of my Father who is in the heavens.
7:22 For there will be many saying to me in that day: "Lord, Lord, prophesied we not in thy name? and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy name did many mighty works?"
7:23 And then I shall profess unto them: "I never knew you; go from me, [the] workers of iniquity."
7:24 Every one, then, who heareth these my words, and (is) doing them, I shall liken him to a wise man, who built his house upon the rock.
7:25 And the rain came down; the rivers came and struck that house, and it fell not; for its foundation was established upon the rock.
7:26 And every one who heareth these my words, and (is) doing them not, I shall liken him to a foolish man, this (one) who built his house upon the sand.
7:27 And the rain descended; the rivers came; the winds blew; they struck that house, and it fell; and its fall was great.'
7:28 And it came to pass (that), Jesus having finished these words, the multitudes were wondering at his teaching:
7:29 for he was teaching them as having authority, and not as their scribes.
8:1 And having come down from upon the mountain, great multitudes walked after him.
8:2 And lo, a leper came to him: he worshipped him, saying: My Lord, if thou shouldst wish, it is possible for thee to cleanse me.'
8:3 And having stretched out his hand, he touched him, saying: I wish, be cleansed.' And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
8:4 And Jesus said to him: 'See, tell it not to any one, but go shew thyself to the priest, and offer thy gift which Moses commanded for a witness to them.'
8:5 And having come into Capernaum a centurion came to him, beseeching him,
8:6 saying: My Lord, my servant (lit. child) lieth in my house being paralysed and afflicted greatly.'
8:7 And he said to him: 'I will come and heal him.'
8:8 And the centurion answered, he said: My Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst come in under (the) roof of my house. But only say with (the) word and my servant (lit. child) shall be cured.
8:9 For I also am a man set under authority, having (lit. being) soldiers under me: if I should say to this (one), "Go," he goeth; another, "Come," he cometh; and my servant," Do this," he doeth it.'
8:10 And Jesus having heard, wondered, and said to them who were walking after him: Verily I say to you that I found not faith of this degree from any in Israel.
8:11 And I say to you that many shall come from [the] east and (the) west, and shall sit down to meat with Abram and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of the heavens.
8:12 And the sons of the kingdom shall be cast out to the outer darkness, the place in which will be (the) weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.'
8:13 And Jesus said to the centurion, Go: as thou believedst, it shall be done to thee.' And the servant (lit. child) was cured in that hour.
8:14 And Jesus having come into (the) house of Peter, saw his wife's mother lying, and sick of a fever.
8:15 He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose and ministered to them.
8:16 And evening having come, they brought to him multitudes having (lit. being) demons with them, and he was casting out the spirits with (the) word, and he healed all who were afflicted.
8:17 That it might be fulfilled which he spake by Esaias the prophet, saying: He took our sicknesses, and carried our diseases.'
8:18 And Jesus having seen the multitudes who were around him, commanded to go across.
8:19 And a scribe having come to him, said to him: Teacher, let me walk after thee whither thou wentest.'
8:20 And Jesus said to him: The foxes have holes, and the birds of (the) heaven have nests; but (the) Son of (the) man hath not where to lay his head.'
8:21 And another of his disciples said to him: My Lord, give me authority first to go and bury my father.'
8:22 But Jesus said to him: Walk after me; and leave the dead, let them bury their dead.'
8:23 And (he) having entered into (the) ship, his disciples walked after him.
8:24 And lo, there was a great storm in (the) sea, so that the waves covered the ship. And he was sleeping.
8:25 And they woke him, saying: Lord, save us; we shall perish.'
8:26 And he said to them: Wherefore are ye doubtful, (ye) of [the] little faith?'Then having risen he rebuked the winds and (the) sea; and there was a great calm.
8:27 And the men were wondering, saying: What manner (of man) is this, because the winds and (the) sea obey him!'
8:28 And having come across to (the) country of (the) Gergesenes, two men came out to meet him having (lit. being) the demons with them, coming out of the sepulchres, very fierce so that no one could pass by that way.
8:29 And lo, they cried out, saying: What (hast) thou with us, Son of God? Camest thou hither to destroy us before that it is our time?'
8:30 And there was a herd of many swine at a distance from them feeding.
8:31 And the demons were beseeching him, saying: If thou wilt cast us out, send us into the herd of swine.'
8:32 And he said to them: Go.' And they having come out, went into the swine. And behold the whole herd of swine went with a rush by the precipice down to (the) sea, and they died in the waters.
8:33 And they who fed them fled; and having gone to the city they told them everything, and concerning them who [had] the demons with them.
8:34 And lo, the whole city came out to meet Jesus. And having seen him, they were beseeching him that he should go away from their boundaries.
9:1 And having entered into (the) ship he came across; he came into his city.
9:2 And lo, they brought to him one paralysed and prostrate upon a bed, and Jesus having seen their faith, said to him who was paralysed: 'Be of good cheer, my son; thy sins are forgiven thee.'
9:3 And lo, some of the scribes said within themselves: This (man) blasphemeth.'
9:4 And Jesus having seen their thoughts said: Wherefore think ye evil things in your hearts?
9:5 For what is easy to say: "Thy sins are forgiven thee;" or to say: "Rise, and walk?"
9:6 But that ye may know that (the) Son of (the) man hath authority to forgive sin upon the earth;'then he said to him who was paralysed: 'Rise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house.'
9:7 And he arose, he went to his house.
9:8 And the multitudes having seen, feared: and they glorified God, who gave authority thus to [the] men.
9:9 And Jesus passed from there, he saw a man sitting at a custom-house, whose name is Matthew; and he said to him: Walk after me.' And he arose, he walked after him.
9:10 And (as he is) sitting at meat in (the) house of Simon, lo, publicans came, they sat down to meat with Jesus and his disciples.
9:11 And the Pharisees having seen, were saying to his disciples: Wherefore eateth your Teacher with the publicans and the sinners?'
9:12 But Jesus having heard, said to them: They who are strong have not need of the physician, but they who are diseased.
9:13 But go, learn what it is--pity I wish for, and not sacrifice: for I came not to invite the righteous, but the sinners.'
9:14 Then came to him the disciples of John, saying: 'Wherefore do we and the Pharisees fast many (times), but thy disciples--they fast not?'
9:15 And Jesus said to them: Is it possible for the sons of the bridegroom to mourn while the bridegroom is with them? but days come whenever the bridegroom shall be taken from them: then they shall fast.
9:16 No one taketh up a piece of new cloth and putteth it on a torn garment; for (the new cloth) draweth away its filling up from the garment, and a rent becometh greater.
9:17 Neither do they put new wine into old bottles: otherwise the bottles are rent, and the wine is poured out, and the bottles perish: but they put new wine into new bottles, and they support one another.'
9:18 And (as he is) saying these (things), lo, a ruler came, he worshipped him, saying:'My daughter died now: but come, lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.'
9:19 And Jesus arose, he walked after him and his disciples.
9:20 And lo, a woman, having an issue of blood twelve years, came forth behind him, she touched (the) hem of his garment:
9:21 for she said in herself: I should only touch (the) hem of his garment, I shall be saved.'
9:22 But Jesus having turned himself and having seen her, said: Be of good cheer, my daughter; thy faith saved thee.' And the woman was cured from that hour.
9:23 And Jesus having come into (the) house of the ruler, saw the singers, and the multitudes making a tumult.
9:24 [For] he was saying: Come from there; for the child died not, but slept.' And they were mocking him.
9:25 But when he (had) put forth the multitude, he went in, he laid hold on her hand, and the child arose.
9:26 And her fame went out over all that land.
9:27 And Jesus coming from there, two blind men walked after him, crying out, saying: Pity us, Son of David.'
9:28 And (he) having come into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus said to them: Believe ye that it is possible for me to do this? They said to him: Yea, our Lord.'
9:29 Then he touched their eyes, saying: 'According to your faith it shall be done to you.'
9:30 And their eyes opened: and Jesus ordered them, saying: See! let no one know (it).'
9:31 But they having come out, spread his fame abroad in all that land.
9:32 And (as he is) coming from there, lo, they brought to him a dumb (man) having (lit. being) a demon with him.
9:33 And (he) having cast out the demon, the dumb spake: and the multitudes were wondering, saying: 'Nothing ever appeared (lit. manifested him) thus in Israel.'
9:34 But the Pharisees were saying, that by (lit. in) (the) ruler of the demons he cast out the demons.
9:35 And Jesus was going round all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease.
9:36 But having seen the multitudes he had compassion upon them, because they were going astray and were being scattered as sheep not having a shepherd.
9:37 Then he said to his disciples The harvest indeed is great, but the labourers are few.
9:38 Pray, then, (the) Lord of the harvest that he send labourers forth to his harvest.'
10:1 And having called the twelve disciples, he gave authority to them over the unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every sickness and every disease.
10:2 Now the names (lit. name) of the twelve apostles are these: the first is Simon, who is called Peter,' and Andrew his brother; James (the) son of Zebedee, and John his brother;
10:3 Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James (the) son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
10:4 Simon the Cananaean, and Judas Iscariot, who will deliver him (up).
10:5 These (lit, the) twelve Jesus sent, having ordered them, saying: Go not to (the) road of the Gentiles, nor enter city of the Samaritans.
10:6 But go ye rather to the stray sheep of (the) house of Israel.
10:7 And (as ye are) walking, preach, saying that the kingdom of the heavens approached.
10:8 Them who are sick, heal; the dead, raise; the lepers, cleanse; the demons, cast out: ye received freely, give freely.
10:9 Put not gold for you, nor silver, nor brass in your girdles;
10:10 nor (take) scrip for you on (the) road, nor two coats, nor shoe, nor staff: for the labourer is worthy of his food.
10:11 And the city which ye will go into or the village,--ask in it who is worthy; and abide there until ye go thence.
10:12 Being about to go into the house salute it.
10:13 And if indeed the house is worthy of your peace, it shall come upon it; but if it is not worthy, your peace shall return to you.
10:14 And he who will not receive you to him, and who will not hearken to your words, coming out of the house or that city or the village, shake off (the) dust of your feet.
10:15 Verily I say to you, that they shall spare (the) land of Sodom and Gomorra in the day of the judgement than that city.
10:16 Lo, I send you as sheep in (the) midst of wolves: become, then, wise as the serpents, but harmless as the doves.
10:17 But beware of [the] men: for they will deliver you to councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues;
10:18 and they shall bring you to the kings and the governors because of me, for a witness to them and the Gentiles.
10:19 But if they should deliver you (up) take no care either how or what ye will say: for it will be given you in that day whit ye will speak.
10:20 For it is not ye who will speak, but the Spirit of your Father which will speak in you.
10:21 And brother shall deliver brother to (the) death, and father shall deliver (up) son: and sons, rising upon their fathers, shall kill them.
10:22 And ye shall become hated by all because of my name: but he who will hold on until the end (lit. out), this (one) will be saved.
10:23 But if they should persecute you in this city, flee to another: verily I say to you, that ye shall not attain to pass through the cities of Israel, until (the) Son of (the) man come.
10:24 A disciple is not greater than his teacher, nor a servant greater than his lord.
10:25 It is sufficient for the disciple that he be as his teacher, and the servant that he be as his lord. If they called the owner of the house "Belzeboul," how much more (shall they call) his household?
10:26 Fear not then them: for there is not that which is covered, (except) that it will be revealed; nor hidden, (except) that it will be known.
10:27 That which I say to you in darkness, say in light: and that which ye hear in your ears, preach upon your housetops.
10:28 And fear not him who will kill your body, while it is not possible for them to kill your soul: but fear that one for whom it is possible to destroy the soul and the body in the Geenna.
10:29 Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall upon the earth without the will of your Father who is in the heavens:
10:30 but the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
10:31 Fear not, then, for ye are better than many sparrows.
10:32 Every one who will confess me before men, I shall confess him also before my Father who is in the heavens.
10:33 But he who will deny me before men, I shall deny him also before my Father who is in the heavens.
10:34 Think not that I came to send (lit. cast) peace on the earth: I came not to send (lit. cast) peace, but a sword.
10:35 For I came to set a man at variance against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law:
10:36 and the man's foes are his household.
10:37 He who loveth his father or his mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who loveth his son or his daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
10:38 He who will not take up his cross and walk after me, is not worthy of me.
10:39 He who found his life shall lose it; he who will lose his life because of me shall find it.
10:40 He who receiveth you, received me, and he who receiveth me received him who sent me.
10:41 He who receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward; and he who receiveth a righteous (man) in the name of a righteous (man) shall receive a righteous (man's) reward.
10:42 And he who will give to drink to one of these little (ones) a cup of cold water only, in (the) name of a disciple, verily I say to you, that his reward shall not perish.'
11:1 And it came to pass (that) Jesus having finished commanding his twelve disciples went away from there to teach and preach in their cities.
11:2 Now John having heard, being in the prison, concerning the works of Christ, sent two of his disciples.
11:3 He said to him: Art thou he who cometh, or look we for another?'
11:4 And Jesus having answered, said to them: Go, tell John the things which ye see and the' things which ye hear:
11:5 that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise, the poor have good tidings preached to them.
11:6 And blessed is he who will not be offended in me.'
11:7 And these being about to go, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John:'What came ye out to the wilderness to see? a reed--the wind shaking it?
11:8 But what came ye out to see? a man clothed (lit. being) in soft clothes? Behold, those with soft garments are in the houses of the kings.
11:9 But wherefore came ye out? to see a prophet? Yea, I say to you, more than a prophet.
11:10 For this is he concerning whom it is written: "Lo, I will send (the) messenger before thee, and he shall prepare in front of thee."
11:11 Verily, I say to you, that no one rose among them that are born of women greater than John the Baptist; but the lesser than he in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he.
11:12 And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of the heavens suffereth violence, and (the) violent take it by force.
11:13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
11:14 And if ye wish to receive him, he is Elias who cometh.
11:15 He who hath an ear to hear, let him hear.
11:16 But to whom am I to liken this generation? It is like to children sitting in the market-places, these who call to one another,
11:17 saying, "We sang to you, and ye danced not; we wept, and ye wailed not."
11:18 For John came, not eating and not drinking; they said that there is a demon with him.
11:19 And (the) Son of (the) man came eating and drinking; they said: "Lo, a man gluttonous and (a) winebibber, (he) is (the) friend of the publicans and the sinners!" And [the] wisdom was justified from her works.'
11:20 Then he began to upbraid the cities in which most of his mighty works were done, and they repented not.
11:21 Woe to thee, Chorazin woe to thee, Bethsaida! because if these mighty works (had) been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, long ago they would (have) repented in sackcloth and ashes.
11:22 But I say to you, that they shall spare Tyre and Sidon in (the) day of the judgement rather than you.
11:23 And thou, Kapharnaum, wilt thou be exalted up to (the) heaven? thou shalt be humiliated down to Amenti: because if in Sodom (had) been done these mighty works which were done in thee, how would they not (have) remained until to-day!
11:24 But I say to you, that they shall spare (the) land of Sodom in (the) day of the judgement rather than thee.'
11:25 And at that time Jesus answered and said: I thank thee, Father, Lord of (the) heaven and the earth, because thou hiddest these (things) from (the) wise and understanding, and revealedst them to little children.
11:26 Yea, Father, because this is the good pleasure which was before thee.
11:27 All things hath (the) Father given me: and no one knoweth (the) Son except (the) Father, nor doth any one know (the) Father except (the) Son, and he to whom (the) Son willeth to reveal (him).
11:28 Come to me, all who toil and are laden under their burdens, and I will give you rest.
11:29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; because I (am) meek and I am humble in my heart: and ye shall find a resting-place for your souls.
11:30 For my yoke (is) sweet, and my burden (is) light.'
12:1 And at that time Jesus went on (the) Sabbath through the cornfields; and his disciples had hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn to eat.
12:2 But the Pharisees having seen, said to him: Lo, thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do on (the) Sabbath.'
12:3 But he said to them: Did ye not read what David did, having hungered, and they who were with him;
12:4 how he went into (the) house of God, and ate the shewbread, of which it was not right for him to eat, nor for them who were with him, but only for the priests?
12:5 Or did ye not read in the law, that on the Sabbaths the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and no sin attaches to them?
12:6 But I say to you, that lo, (one) greater than the temple (is) in this place.
12:7 If ye were knowing what this meaneth, pity is what I wish for, and not sacrifice, ye would not have judged the sinless.
12:8 For the lord of (the) Sabbath is (the) Son of (the) man.'
12:9 And having gone away from there, he came into their synagogue:
12:10 and lo, (there was) a man whose hand was (lit. is) withered, and they asked him, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?'that they might accuse him.
12:11 And he said to them: What man who is among you, having a sheep, and (if) this fall into a pit on the Sabbath, will he not lay hold on it and raise it up?
12:12 How much better then is a man than a sheep! So that it is lawful to do good on the Sabbaths.'
12:13 Then he said to the man: Stretch forth thy hand.' And he stretched it forth, and it was cured as the other.
12:14 The Pharisees having come forth, took counsel against him, that they might destroy him.
12:15 And Jesus having known, went away from there; and great multitudes followed him; and he healed them all.
12:16 He charged them that they should not make him known:
12:17 that it might be fulfilled which he spake by Esaias the prophet, saying:
12:18 Behold my servant (lit. child), who was pleasing to me; my beloved, in whom my soul was well pleased: I shall put my Spirit upon him, he shall declare judgement to the Gentiles.
12:19 He shall not strive, nor shall he cry out; nor shall any one hear his voice in the streets.
12:20 A bruised reed he shall not break, smoking flax he shall ot quench, until he send forth the judgement to victory.
12:21 And the Gentiles shall hope in his name.'
12:22 Then they brought to him a blind man having (lit. being) a demon with him, and being dumb: and he healed him, so that the dumb spake and saw.
12:23 But the multitudes were all amazed; they were saying: Is this (the) son of David?'
12:24 But the Pharisees having heard said: This man was not casting out the demons by (lit. in, and thus again) any but by Belzeboul (the) ruler of the demons.'
12:25 And having perceived their thoughts he said to them: Every kingdom, if it should be divided against itself, is brought to desolation; and every city or every house, if they should be divided against themselves, cannot stand:
12:26 and. if Satan cast out Satan, or was divided against himself, how then will his kingdom be able to stand?
12:27 And if I by Belzeboul cast out the demons, by whom did your sons cast out? therefore they shall be judges to you.
12:28 But if by the (lit a) Spirit of God I cast out the demons, then the kingdom of God reached you.
12:29 Or how is it possible that one enter (the) house of the strong man, and spoil his goods, unless he bound the strong man first, and then spoiled his house?
12:30 He who is not with me was against me; and he who gathereth not with me scattereth me away.
12:31 Therefore I say to you, that every sin and every blasphemy shall be forgiven to [the] men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven.
12:32 And he who will say a word at (the) Son of (the) man, it shall be forgiven him; but he who will speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in that which cometh.
12:33 Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree evil, and its fruit evil: for from the fruit they know the tree
12:34 [The] offspring of the vipers, how is it possible for you to speak good things, being evil? for out of (the) abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
12:35 The good man out of his good treasure sendeth forth the good (thing): and the man who is evil, out of his treasure which is evil, sendeth forth (things) which are evil.
12:36 And I say to you, that all vain words which [the] men will say, they will give account about them in (the) day of the judgement.
12:37 For out of thy words thou shalt be justified, and out of thy words thou shah be judged.'
12:38 Then some of the scribes and the Pharisees answered him, saying: Teacher, we wish to see a sign from thee.'
12:39 But he answered, he said to them: The generation which is evil and adulterous seeketh for a sign; and a sign shall not be given to it except the sign of Jona the prophet.
12:40 For as Jona, who was in (the) belly of the whale three days and three nights; thus also (the) Son of (the) man shall be three days and three nights in (the) heart of (the) earth.
12:41 The men of Ninevê shall rise up in the judgement with this generation, and shall judge it: because they repented at (the) preaching of Jona; and lo, greater than Jona (is) here.
12:42 The queen of (the) south shall rise up in the judgement with this generation and shall judge it: because she came from (the) ends of (the) earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and lo, greater than Solomon (is) here.
12:43 But if the unclean spirit come out of the man, he goeth forth to dry places, seeking for (a) resting-place, and findeth not.
12:44 Then he saith: "I shall return into my house, the place from which I came; "and if he should come, and find it empty, swept and garnished.
12:45 Then he goeth, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more evil than himself, and he cometh and dwelleth there: and the last (states) of that man are worse for him than his first. Thus it will be for this generation which is evil.'
12:46 And while he is speaking with the multitudes, lo, his mother and his brothers were standing outside. seeking to speak with him.
12:47 And one of the disciples said to him: Behold thy mother and thy brothers outside seek for thee.'
12:48 But he answered, he said to him who told him: Who is my mother? or who are my brothers?'
12:49 And he stretched out his hand upon his disciples, he said: Behold my mother and my brothers!
12:50 For every one who will do the will of my Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother and my sister and my mother.'
13:1 On that day Jesus having come out of the house was sitting by (the) sea.
13:2 And great multitudes gathered to him, so that he entered into (the) ship, and sat; and the whole multitude was standing on (the) sea (shore).
13:3 And he was speaking with them many (things) in parables, saying: Lo, the sower came forth to sow.
13:4 And in (the) sowing some indeed fell by the road, and the birds came and ate them:
13:5 and others fell upon the rocky place, the place in which there was not depth of earth: and they grew up immediately, because they had not depth of earth:
13:6 and (the) sun having risen, they were scorched; and because they had not root there, they withered away.
13:7 And others fell upon the thorns; and the thorns grew up, and choked them:
13:8 and others fell upon the good earth, and yielded fruit; one indeed produced a hundred, and another produced sixty, and another produced thirty.
13:9 He who hath an ear to hear let him hear.'
13:10 And his disciples having come to him, said to him:'Wherefore speakest thou with them in parables?'
13:11 And he answered, he said: To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not given.
13:12 For to him who hath shall be given, and it shall be exceeding to him: but he who hath not, that which he hath shall be taken away from him.
13:13 Therefore I speak with them in parables: because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.
13:14 And the prophecy of Esaias shall be fulfilled upon them, which saith: By hearing (lit. in a voice) ye shall hear and shall not understand; and by (lit. in) seeing ye shall see and shall not see.
13:15 For (the) heart of this people thickened, and they were heavy in their ears for (the) hearing, and they shut their eyes; lest haply they should see with their eyes, and hear in their ears, and understand in their heart, and return, and I should cure them."
13:16 But blessed are your eyes, because they see; and your ears, because they hear.
13:17 Verily I say to you, that many prophets and righteous (men) desired to see the things which ye see, and they saw them not; and to hear the things which ye hear, and they heard them not.
13:18 Hear ye then the parable of the sower.
13:19 When any one (lit. every one who) heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, the evil (one) cometh and snatcheth away that which was sown in his heart. This is he who was sown by the road.
13:20 And he who was sown upon the rocky place, this is he who heareth the word, and immediately receiveth it with joy.
13:21 He hath no root in him, but is (only) for a time; and if there should be tribulation or persecution because of the word, immediately he is offended.
13:22 And he who was sown upon the thorns, this is he who heareth the word; and (the) care of this age, and the deceit of [the] riches, choke the word in him, and he becometh unfruitful.
13:23 And he who fell upon the good earth, this is he who heareth the word, and who understandeth it; and this (one) yieldeth fruit; and one indeed produceth a hundred; and one produceth sixty; and one produceth thirty.'
13:24 He set before them another parable, saying: The kingdom of the heavens is like a man, who sowed good seed in his field.
13:25 But the men having slept, his enemy came, he sowed tares in (the) midst of the wheat, and went (away).
13:26 But when the wheat grew up, and yielded fruit, then the tares also appeared.
13:27 And the servants of the owner-of-the-field came and said: "Our lord, sowedst thou not good seed in thy field? whence (lit. where) then found they these tares also?"
13:28 And he said to them: "A man (that is) an enemy did this." And they said to him: "Wishest thou that we go and gather them up?"
13:29 But he said: "Nay, lest haply gathering up the tares, ye pluck up also the wheat with them.
13:30 Rather leave them, let them grow up together until (the) time of (the) harvest: and in (the) time of (the) harvest I shall say to the reapers: Gather up the tares first, and bind them in bundles for (the) burning them in the fire: but gather the wheat into my barn.'"'
13:31 He set before them another parable, saying: The kingdom of the heavens is like a grain of mustard seed; which a man took, he sowed it in his field:
13:32 which indeed is small among all seeds; but if it should be grown, it is greatest of the herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of (the) heaven come and lodge upon its branches.'
13:33 Another parable he spake to them: The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which a woman took, she hid it in three measures of meal, until all the dough was leavened.'
13:34 All these things said Jesus to the multitudes in parables; and without parable he was not speaking with them:
13:35 that it might be fulfilled which he spake by the prophet, saying: I am to open my mouth in parables; and speak the things which were hidden from (the) foundation of the world.'
13:36 Then he sent away the multitudes, he came into the house: and his disciples came to him, saying: Explain to us the parable of the tares of the field.'
13:37 And he answered, he said: He who sowed the good seed is (the) Son of (the) man;
13:38 and the field is the world; the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom; and the tares are the sons of the evil (one);
13:39 and the enemy who sowed them is the devil: and the harvest (the) end of this age; and the reapers the angels.
13:40 As, then, they gather up the tares first, and burn them in the fire; thus it will be in (the) end of this age.
13:41 (The) Son of (the) man shall send his angels, and they shall gather up out of his kingdom all the offences, and them who do [the] iniquity;
13:42 and shall cast them to the furnace of fire: the place in which will be (the) weeping and (the) gnashing of the teeth.
13:43 not listed
13:44 The kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hid in a field; which a man found, he hid it; and for [the] joy he went, he sold what he had, and bought that field.
13:45 Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchantman seeking for good pearls:
13:46 having found a pearl of great price, he went, he sold what he had, and bought it.
13:47 Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a net, which was cast into (the) sea, and it gathered of every kind:
13:48 which having been filled, they drew to the shore, and having sat down, they gathered the good into vessels, but the bad they cast away.
13:49 This is as it will be in (the) end of this age: the angels shall come forth, and shall separate the wicked from (the) midst of the good:
13:50 and shall cast them down to the furnace of fire: the place in which will be (the) weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.
13:51 Understood ye all these things?' They said to him: Yea, Lord.'
13:52 He said to them:'Therefore every scribe who is instructed for the kingdom of the heavens is like an owner-of-a-field, who bringeth forth from his treasure things new and old.'
13:53 And it came to pass (that) Jesus having quite finished these parables, went away from there.
13:54 And having come into his city, he was teaching them in their synagogues, so that they wondered and said: 'Whence found this (man) this teaching, and these mighty works?
13:55 Is this (the) son of the carpenter? Is not his mother Mary? and his brothers James, and Josê, and Simon, and Judas?
13:56 And his sisters, are not they all with us? Whence then found this (man) all these things? '
13:57 And they were offended in him. But Jesus said to them: There is not a prophet despised in any place except in his city and his house.'
13:58 And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
14:1 And at that time Herod the tetrarch heard of (the) fame of Jesus
14:2 and said to his servants (lit. children): This is John the Baptist; for he rose from the dead; and therefore the powers work in him.'
14:3 For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, he put him in the prison because of Herodias, (the) wife of Philip his brother.
14:4 For John was saying to him: It is not lawful for thee to take her.'
14:5 And wishing to kill him, he feared the multitude, because he was to them as a prophet.
14:6 And Herod's birthday having come, the daughter of Herodias danced in (the) midst, and was pleasing to Herod.
14:7 Thereupon he took an oath, promising to give her what she will ask.
14:8 And she,--her mother instructed her,--said: Give to me (the) head of John the Baptist in a dish.'
14:9 And (the) heart of (the) king was grieved, but because of the oaths, and them who sat at meat with him, he commanded to give it.
14:10 And he sent, he took off (the) head of John in the prison.
14:11 And it was brought in the dish, it was given to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother.
14:12 And his disciples came, they took up the corpse, they buried it; and they went, they told Jesus.
14:13 And Jesus having heard, went from there in a ship to a desert place: and the multitudes having heard, followed him, they walked on foot from the cities.
14:14 And having come forth, he saw a great multitude, and he had compassion upon them; and he healed them who were sick among them.
14:15 And evening having come, his disciples came to him, saying: The place is desert, and the hour passed away; send the multitudes then away, that they may go to the villages, and buy victuals for themselves.'
14:16 And he said: They have not need to go: give ye to them; let them eat.'
14:17 And they said to him: We have not here but five loaves, and two fishes.'
14:18 And he said to them: Bring them to me hither.'
14:19 And he commanded the multitudes to sit down to meat upon the grass; and having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to (the) heaven, he blessed them, and brake them, and gave the loaves to the disciples; and the disciples gave to the multitudes.
14:20 And they all ate, and were satisfied; and they took up that which remained over of the fragments, they filled twelve baskets full.
14:21 And they who ate were five thousand men, without children and women.
14:22 And immediately he constrained his disciples to enter into (the) ship, and to go (lit. draw) before him across, until he sent away the multitude.
14:23 And having sent away the multitudes, he went up on a mountain apart alone to pray: and evening having come, he was there alone.
14:24 But the ship was at a distance from the land about twenty-five stadia, the waves being against it, for the wind was against it.
14:25 And in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking upon (the) sea.
14:26 And having seen him walking upon (the) sea, they were troubled, saying: It is an apparition.' And they cried out for [the] fear.
14:27 But immediately he spoke with them, saying: of good cheer (lit. find courage); it is I; fear not.'
14:28 And Peter answered, he said to him: Lord, if it is thou, command me to come to thee upon the waters.'
14:29 And he said: Come.' And Peter having come down from the ship, walked upon the waters, to come to Jesus.
14:30 But he saw the wind, he feared, and having begun to sink, he cried out, saying: `Lord, save me.'
14:31 And immediately Jesus having stretched out his hand, took hold of him, and said to him: (Thou) of [the] little faith, wherefore doubtedst thou. (lit. makest two hearts)?'
14:32 And he having entered into the ship, the wind ceased.
14:33 And they who were in the ship worshipped him, saying: Truly thou art (the) Sou of God.'
14:34 And having crossed over, they came into (the) land of Gennesareth.
14:35 And the men of that place having known him, sent forth in all that region round about; and they brought to him all who were afflicted;
14:36 and they were beseeching him that they might only touch (the) hem of his garments: and all who touched were saved.
15:1 Then came to Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes, saying:
15:2 Wherefore do thy disciples transgress the traditions of the elders? for they wash not their hands, being about to eat bread.'
15:3 And he said to them: Wherefore do ye also transgress the commandment of God because of your tradition?
15:4 For God said: "Honour thy father and thy mother: and he who will say an evil word at his father and his mother, he shall die (the) death."
15:5 But ye say that he who will say to his father or his mother: "A gift, thou wilt gain it by me;"
15:6 he shall not honour his father and his mother. And ye made void the word of God because of your traditions.
15:7 [The] hypocrites, well prophesied about you Esaias the prophet, saying:"
15:8 This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart (is) far away from me.
15:9 They shall worship me in vain, teaching for doctrines orders of men."'
15:10 And having called the multitude, he said to them: Hear, and understand:
15:11 that which goeth into the mouth of the man (is) not that which defileth him; but that which cometh from the mouth, this is that which defileth the man.'
15:12 Then came to him his disciples, they said to him: Knowest thou that the Pharisees having heard this word were offended?'
15:13 But he answered, he said: All trees which my Father, who is in the heavens, planted not, will be cut off with their root.
15:14 Leave them: they are blind guides: for a blind man guiding a blind man, they both Fall into a pit.'
15:15 And Peter answered, he said to him Exlpain the parable to us.'
15:16 And he said: (Are) ye also even yet without understanding?
15:17 Know ye not yet, that all things which go into the mouth of the man, go to the belly, and are cast to the draught?
15:18 But the things which come out of the mouth, came out of the heart; these are (they) which defile the man.
15:19 For out of the heart come the evil reasonings, the murders, the adulteries, the fornications, the thefts, the false witnessings, the blasphemies:
15:20 these are they which defile the man; but the eating without washing thyself defileth not the man.'
15:21 And Jesus having come from there, went to the parts of Tyre and Sidon.
15:22 And lo, a Canaanitish woman came out of those boundaries, she was crying out, saying: Pity me, my Lord, (the) son of David; my daughter (is) afflicted, there is a demon with her.'
15:23 But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came, they besought him, saying: Send this woman away; because she crieth out behind us.'
15:24 But he answered, he said: I was not sent to any except the stray sheep of (the) house of Israel.'
15:25 But she worshipped him, saying My Lord, help me.'
15:26 And he answered, he said: It is not good to take away (the) bread of the sons, to give it to the dogs.'
15:27 But she said: Yea, my Lord: for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from the table of their masters.'
15:28 Then Jesus answered, he said to her: O [the] woman, great is thy faith: it shall be to thee as thou wishest.' And her daughter was cured from that hour.
15:29 And Jesus having gone away from there, came by (the) sea of Galilee; and he went upon a mountain, he was sitting there.
15:30 And great multitudes came to him, having (lit. being) with them lame and blind and deaf and maimed and many others; they threw them down at his feet, and he healed them:
15:31 so that the multitudes wondered, seeing the dumb speaking, and the lame walking, and the blind seeing, and the deaf hearing; and they were glorifying (the) God of Israel.
15:32 And Jesus having called to his disciples, said to them: I have compassion upon this multitude, because lo, three days they are here with me, and there is not that which they will eat; and I wish not to send them away without eating; that they shall not faint on the road.'
15:33 The disciples said: Whence are we to find this number of loaves on this desert place, so as to satisfy this multitude? '
15:34 And Jesus said to them: How many loaves have ye? And they said: Seven, and a, few fishes.'
15:35 And he ordered the multitudes to sit down to meat upon the ground.
15:36 He took the seven loaves and the fishes, and having blessed them, he brake them, and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave to the multitudes.
15:37 And they all ate, they were satisfied: and they took up that which remained over of the fragments, they filled seven baskets.
15:38 And they who were eating were four thousand men, without children and women.
15:39 And having sent away the multitude, he entered into the ship, and came to the boundaries of Magdalan.
16:1 And the Pharisees and the Sadducees came, tempting him, they were asking him to show them a sign from (the) heaven.
16:2 But he answered, he said to them: 'If evening should come ye say, that (the) heaven (will be) calm, being red.
16:3 And in the morning ye say, that to-day (will be the) storm, because of the redness of (the) heaven and its gloom. [The] hypocrites, ye know how to discern (the) heaven; and (the) peace of this time ye know not.'
16:4 And he answered, he said to them: The generation which is evil and adulterous seeketh for a sign; and a sign shall not be given it, except the sign of Jona the prophet.' And having left them, he went (away).
16:5 And his disciples having come across, forgot to take bread for them.
16:6 And Jesus said to them: Take heed and beware of (the) leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.'
16:7 And they were reasoning in themselves, saying: We took not bread with us.'
16:8 And Jesus having known (it), said to them: Wherefore reason ye among yourselves, ye of the little faith, because ye have not bread?
16:9 Know ye not yet, nor remember ye the five loaves of the five thousand, (and) that ye took how many baskets?
16:10 Nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, (and) that ye took how many baskets?
16:11 How understand ye not that I was speaking to you not concerning (the) bread? but beware of (the) leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.'
16:12 Then they understood that he said not to them: Beware of (the) leaven of the loaves; but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.'
16:13 Now Jesus having come to the parts of Caesarea Philippi, he was asking his disciples: Who, said [the] men, is (the) Son of (the) man?'
16:14 And they said: Some indeed, "John the Baptist:" and others, "Elias:" and others, "Jeremias or one from the prophets."'
16:15 He said to them: But whom (are) ye saying that I (am)?'
16:16 Simon Peter answered, he said: Thou (art) Christ, (the) Son of (the) living God.'
16:17 Jesus answered, he said to him: Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, because flesh and blood revealed not this to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens.
16:18 I say to thee, that thou art Peter, I shall build my church upon this rock: and the gates of Amenti shall not have power against it.
16:19 I shall give thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens: that which thou wilt bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens: and that which thou wilt loose upon the earth shall be loosed in the heavens.'
16:20 Then he ordered his disciples that they should not say to any one that he is Jesus Christ.
16:21 From that time Jesus Christ began to shew to his disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise.
16:22 And Peter laid hold on him, he began to rebuke him, saying: (God) have mercy on thee, my Lord: this shall not be to thee.'
16:23 But he said to Peter: Go behind me, Satan: because thou art an offence to me: because thou mindest not the things of God, but the things of [the] men.'
16:24 Then said Jesus to his disciples: He who wisheth to walk after me, let him deny himself, and let him take up his cross, and walk after me.
16:25 For he who wisheth to save his life (lit. soul, thus again) shall destroy it: and he who will destroy his life because of me shall find it.
16:26 For what will [the] man gain, if he should gain the whole world, and forfeit his soul? otherwise, what will [the] man give in exchange for his soul?
16:27 For (the) Son of (the) man (is) coming in (the) glory of his Father and his angels: then he will give to each one according to his works.
16:28 Verily I say to you, that there are some among them who stand here, (who) will not taste of (the) death, until they see (the) Son of (the) man coming in (the) glory of his Father.'
17:1 And after six days Jesus, having taken away Peter, and James, and John his brother, led them upon a high mountain apart alone:
17:2 and he changed himself in form before them: and his face gave light as (the) sun, and his clothes were white as the light.
17:3 And lo, Moses and Elias manifested themselves to them, speaking to him.
17:4 Peter answered, he said to Jesus: 'My Lord, it is good for us that we are here: wishest thou that we make three tabernacles here? one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.'
17:5 When he (is) speaking, lo, a cloud of light shadowed over them: and lo, there was a voice out of the cloud, saying: This is my son, my beloved, he, in whom my soul was well pleased; hearken to him.'
17:6 And the disciples having heard (it), fell upon their face, and feared greatly.
17:7 And Jesus came to them, he touched them, he said: Rise, fear not.'
17:8 And having lifted up their eyes they saw not any one except Jesus alone.
17:9 And (as they are) coining down from upon the mountain, Jesus ordered them, saying: Tell not any one the vision, until (the) Son of (the) man rise from the dead.'
17:10 And the disciples asked him, saying: Wherefore say the scribes that Elias cometh first?'
17:11 And he answered, he said: `Elias indeed (is) coming, and will shew you everything:
17:12 but I say to you, that Elias already came, and they knew him not, but did to him everything which they willed. Thus also (the) Son of (the) man will receive pain from them.'
17:13 Then his disciples understood that he spake to them concerning John the Baptist.
17:14 And they having come to the multitude, a man came to him, throwing himself upon his knees,
17:15 and saying: Pity my son: because he is epileptic and is afflicted greatly: for many times he falleth into the fire, and many times he falleth into (the) water.
17:16 And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not heal him.'
17:17 Then Jesus answered he said to him: O [the] faithless generation and which is perverse, how long will I be with you? how long will I have patience with you? bring him to me hither.'
17:18 And Jesus rebuked him; and the demon came out of him: and the child was cured from that hour.
17:19 Then the disciples came to Jesus apart alone, and said to him: Wherefore could we not cast him out?'
17:20 And he said to them: Because of your little faith: verily I say to you, that if ye have faith as a grain of mustard-seed, ye shall say to this mountain, "Go away from here thither," and it shall go away; and nothing shall be impossible for you.'
17:21
17:22 And they having returned up to Galilee, Jesus said to them: (The) Son of (the) man will be given into (the) hands of [the] men;
17:23 and they will kill him, and after three days he shall rise.' And their heart was greatly grieved.
17:24 And having come up to Kapharnaum, they who received tribute came to Peter, and said to him: Doth not your master pay tribute?'
17:25 He said: Yea.' And having come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying: What thinkest thou, Simon? the kings of (the) earth--from whom (are) they taking toll or tax? from the sons, or from the strangers?' And he said: From the strangers.'
17:26 And he having said: From the strangers,' Jesus answered him: The sons then are free.
17:27 That ye may not offend them, go to (the) sea, cast thy hook, and the first fish which will come up, take it; and if thou should open the mouth, thou shalt find a stater: take it, give it to them for me and thee.'
18:1 And in that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying: Who then is the great in the kingdom of the heavens?'
18:2 And he called a little child, and made him stand in their midst,
18:3 and said: Verily I say to you, that unless ye turn yourselves, and become as this child, ye shall not come into the kingdom of the heavens.
18:4 He then who will humiliate himself as this child, this is the great in the kingdom of the heavens.
18:5 And he who will to him such a child in my name receiveth me:
18:6 but he who will offend one of these little ones who believe me, it is profitable for him that a millstone be hanged to him, and that he be drowned in (the) sea.
18:7 Woe to the world because of the offences! for it is necessary that the offences come; but woe to the man by whom the offence cometh!
18:8 If thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, cast them from thee: it is good for thee that thou come into the life being lame or being maimed, than having two hands or two feet that thou be cast into the eternal fire.
18:9 And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, cast it from thee: for it is good for thee that thou come into the life having (one) eye, than having two eyes that thou be cast into the Gehenna of [the] fire.
18:10 Take heed then! despise not one of these little (ones); for I say to you, that their angels in the heavens always see (the) face of my Father who is in the heavens.
18:11
18:12 And what think ye? if a man should have a hundred sheep, and one of them go astray, leaveth he not the ninety-nine upon the mountain, and goeth, and seeketh for that which went astray?
18:13 And if it should happen that he find it, verily I say to you, that he rejoiceth over it more than the ninety-nine which go not astray.
18:14 Thus it is not (the) wish of my Father, who is in the heavens, that one of these little (ones) perish.
18:15 And if thy brother should sin against thee, go and convict him between thee and him alone: if he should willhearken to thee, thou shalt gain thy brother.
18:16 But if he should not hearken to thee, take another or two also with thee, that out of the mouth of two or three witnesses all words may be established.
18:17 And if he should not hearken to them, tell it to the church: and if he should not hearken to the church, he shall be to thee as a Gentile and a publican.
18:18 Verily I say to you, that the things which ye will bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens: and the things which ye will loose upon the earth shall be loosed in the heavens.
18:19 Again I say to you, that if two among you should agree upon the earth concerning all things which they ask for, it shall be done for them of my Father who is in the heavens.
18:20 For the place in which two or three are gathered together in my name, I am there in their midst.'
18:21 Then Peter came to him, he said to him: My Lord, if my brother should sin against me, and I forgive him, until how many times? until seven times?'
18:22 Jesus said to him: say to thee not until seven times, but seven seventy times.
18:23 Therefore the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a king who wished to reckon with his servants.
18:24 And having begun to reckon, one was brought to him, who owed many talents.
18:25 But he hath not (wherewith) to give them; and his lord commanded to sell him, and his wife, and his sons, and everything which he had, and to pay them.
18:26 Having thrown himself down then, that servant was worshipping him, saying: "My lord, (have) patience with me, and I will pay them to thee all."
18:27 And the lord of that servant having compassion released him, and forgave him all his debt.
18:28 But that servant having come forth, found one of his fellow-servants, who owed him a hundred staters: and having laid hold on him, he took him by the throat, saying: "Give (me) thy debt."
18:29 Having thrown him-elf down then, his fellow-servant was beseeching him, saying: "(Have) patience with me, and I will pay them to thee all."
18:30 And he wished not: but he went, he threw him to the prison, until he gave his debt.
18:31 So his fellow-servants having seen the things which were done, their heart was greatly grieved, and having come, they told their lord all things which were done.
18:32 Then his lord called him, he said to him: "[The] wicked servant, I forgave thee all thy debt, because thou besoughtest me.
18:33 Was it not right that thou shouldest have pity upon thy fellow-servant, as they had pity for thee?"
18:34 And having been angry, his lord gave him to the tormentors, until he should pay all his debt.
18:35 Thus will my Father which is in the heavens do to you, unless each of you forgive his brother with his whole heart.'
19:1 And it came to pass (that) Jesus having finished these sayings, went away from Galilee, he came to the boundaries of Judea beyond the Jordan;
19:2 and great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there.
19:3 And Pharisees came to him, tempting him, saying: 'Is it lawful for the man to put away his wife for every sin?'
19:4 And he said: Did ye not read, from (the) beginning male and female he created them.'
19:5 And he said: Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother and shall join himself to his wife: and they two shall become one flesh.
19:6 So that they are no longer two, but it is one flesh. That then which God joined, let not (the) man separate.'
19:7 They said to him: Wherefore then did Moses order to give (a) writing of divorcement, and to put them away?'
19:8 He said to them: Because of your hardness of heart did Moses command you to put away your wives: but from (the) beginning it was not thus.
19:9 And I say to you, that he who will put away his wife, without word of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and he who will marry her who is put away committeth adultery.'
19:10 His disciples said to him: If thus is (the) case of the man with the wife, it is profitable not to marry.'
19:11 But he said to them It is not every one (who) receiveth this word, but only they to whom it is given.
19:12 For there are eunuchs, who were born from their mother's womb: there are other eunuchs, whom [the] men made eunuchs: and there are other eunuchs, who made themselves eunuchs because of the kingdom of the heavens. He for whom it is possible to receive (it) to him, let him receive (it).'
19:13 Then they brought to him children, that he should lay hand upon them, and pray over (lit. upon) them: and the disciples rebuked them.
19:14 But Jesus said to them: Permit the children, forbid them not to come to me: for of such is the kingdom of the heavens.'
19:15 And having laid hand upon them, he went from there.
19:16 And lo, one came to him, he said to him: (The) teacher, what good (thing) wilt I do, that I may inherit eternal life?
19:17 And he said to him: ':Wherefore askest thou me concerning the good? one is the good, God: but if thou wishest to come into the life, keep the commandments.'
19:18 He said to him: What are (they)?'And Jesus said to him: Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness.
19:19 Honour thy father and thy mother: and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.'
19:20 The young man said to him: All these I kept from my youth, what further lack I?
19:21 Jesus answered him: If thou wishest to be perfect, go, sell that which thou hast, give them to the poor, and thou shalt get for thee a treasure in (the) heaven: and come, follow me.'
19:22 But the young man having heard the word went (away with) his heart grieving: for he had many possessions.
19:23 And Jesus said to his disciples: Verily I say to you, that it is difficult that a rich man come into the kingdom of the heavens.
19:24 Again I say to you, that it is easier that a camel enter in (the) eye of a needle, than that a rich man enter into the kingdom of God.'
19:25 And the disciples having heard, wondered greatly, saying: For whom then is it possible to be saved?'
19:26 And Jesus having looked (upon them), said to them: 'For men impossible is this; but for God everything is possible.'
19:27 Then Peter answered, he said to him: we left everything and we followed thee: what then will be to us?'
19:28 And Jesus said to them: Verily I say to you, that ye of those who walked after me, in the re-creation if (the) Son of (the) man should sit on (the) throne of his glory, they shall seat you also on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
19:29 And every one who left brother, or sister, or father, or mother, or wife, or son, or land, or house, because of my name, shall receive a hundredfold, and he shall inherit the eternal life.
19:30 For there are many first about to be last; and last about to be first.
20:1 The kingdom of the heavens is like a man,--owner of land,--who came out in the morning to hire labourers to his vineyard.
20:2 And he settled with the labourers to give to them on the day a stater for each, and he sent them to his vineyard.
20:3 And having come out at (the) third hour, he saw others standing in the market-place idle;
20:4 he said to these others: "Go ye also to (the) vineyard, and that which is right I will give to you." And they went.
20:5 Again he came out at (the) sixth hour and (the) ninth hour, he did again thus.
20:6 And having come out at (the) eleventh hour, he found others standing; and he said to them: "Why stand ye here all the day idle?"
20:7 They said to him: "Because no one hired us for (the) hire." He said to them: Go ye also to (the) vineyard."
20:8 And evening having come, the lord of (the) vineyard said to his steward: "Call the labourers, give their hire to them, having begun from the last unto the first
20:9 And they of the eleventh hour having come, received a stater for each.
20:10 And the first having come, were thinking that they will receive more; and they also received a stater for each.
20:11 And having received, they murmured at the owner of land,
20:12 saying. "These last did (but) an hour of work, and thou madest them equal with us (being) of them, who bore (the) burden of the day, and the scorching heat."
20:13 But he answered, he said to one of them: "My friend, I treat thee not with violence: was it not a stater which I settled with thee?
20:14 Take that which is thine (and) go: and I wish to give to this last, as to thee.
20:15 Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with (lit. in) the things which are mine? Is thine eye evil because I am good?"
20:16 Thus the last shall be first, and the first shall be last.'
20:17 Jesus, being about to go up to Jerusalem, took to him the twelve by (lit. between him and them) themselves, and said to them on the road:
20:18 Lo, we will go up to Jerusalem; and (the) Son of (the) man will be delivered into (the) hands of the chief priests and the scribes; and they will condemn him to (the) death,
20:19 and they will deliver him to the Gentiles to mock him, and they will scourge him and crucify him: and after three days he shall rise.'
20:20 Then came to him (the) mother of the (sons) of Zebedee with her sons, worshipping him, and asking him for a thing.
20:21 And he said to her: What wishest thou?' She said to him: Command, that my two sons may sit, one of them on thy right hand, one of them on thy left hand, in thy kingdom.'
20:22 But Jesus answered, he said: Ye know not concerning what ye asked. Is it possible for you to drink the cup which I will drink?'They said to him It is possible for us.'
20:23 And Jesus said to them: The cup indeed ye shall drink: but to sit on my right hand or my left hand is not mine to give, but it belongs to them for whom my Father, who is in the heavens, prepared it.'
20:24 And the ten other disciples having heard, murmured because of the two brothers.
20:25 But Jesus called, he said to them: Ye know that the rulers of the Gentiles are lords of them, and their great (ones) also are in authority over them.
20:26 And thus it will not be among you; but he who wishes to be great among you shall be minister to you;
20:27 and he who wishes to be first among you shall be servant to you:
20:28 as also (the) Son of (the) man came not to be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life a redemption for many.'
20:29 And (as he is) coming out of Jericho, a great multitude walked after him.
20:30 And lo, two blind men sat by the road; having heard that Jesus will pass by, they cried out, saying: Our Lord, pity us, Jesus, (the) son of David.'
20:31 And the multitude was rebuking them, that they should hold their peace: but they cried out more, saying: Our Lord, pity us, (the) son of David.'
20:32 And Jesus having stood, called them, and said to them:'What will ye wish that I should do to you?'
20:33 They said to him: Our Lord, that our eyes may open.'
20:34 And Jesus having compassion, touched their eyes: immediately they saw, and followed him.
21:1 And when they approached Jerusalem, they came to Bethphage, at the mountain of the Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
21:2 saying to them: Go to this village which is in front of you, and ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them, bring them to me.
21:3 And if any one should speak to you, say, that the Lord has need of them; and he will send them immediately.'
21:4 Now this was done, that it might be fulfilled which he spoke by the prophet, saying:
21:5 Say to (the) daughter of Sion, that lo, thy King cometh, being meek, mounted on an ass, and a colt (the) foal of an ass.'
21:6 And his disciples having gone, and having done according as Jesus commanded them,
21:7 brought the ass, and the colt, and placed on them their garments; and made him sit above them.
21:8 And the most part of the multitudes spread their garments on the road; others cut branches from the trees, they spread them on the road.
21:9 And the multitudes walked before him, and they who were walking after him, were crying out, saying: Osanna, (the) son of David, blessed is he who cometh in (the) name of the Lord; Osanna in the highest.'
21:10 And having come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred, saying: Who is this?'
21:11 And the multitudes said, that this is the prophet. Jesus, the Nazarene of Galilee.'
21:12 And Jesus went into the temple, and cast out all who sold in the temple and them who bought, and the tables of the money-changers he overthrew, and the seats of them who sold doves,
21:13 and he said to them: It is written, that my house shall be called "a house of prayer;" but ye make it a den of robbers.'
21:14 And blind and lame having come to him in the temple, he healed them.
21:15 And the chief priests and the scribes having seen the wonders which he did, and the children who cried out in the temple, saying: Osanna, (the) son of David,' murmured,
21:16 and said to him: Hearest thou not what these say?' And Jesus said to them: Yea: did ye never read in the Scriptures, that out of the mouths of little children and sucklings thou preparedst the praise?'
21:17 And having left them, he came outside of the city to Bethany; he slept there.
21:18 Now morning having come, he returned to the city, he hungered.
21:19 And having seen a fig-tree on the road, and having come to it, he found not anything upon it except leaves only: and he said to it: Fruit shall not come from thee for ever.' And the fig-tree withered away from that hour.
21:20 And the disciples having seen, wondered, saying: How this fig-tree withered away in this hour !'
21:21 And Jesus answered, he said to them: Verily I say to you, that if ye have faith, and doubt not, not only will ye do this which is done to this fig-tree, but if ye should say to this mountain, "Lift thyself up, and go into the sea," it shall be done.
21:22 And everything which ye will ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.'
21:23 And he having come to the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him teaching, saying: With what authority didst thou these things? and who gave to thee this authority? '
21:24 Jesus answered, he said to them: I will also ask of you a word: if ye should tell me it, I also will tell you with what authority I did these things.
21:25 The baptism of John, whence was it from? from (the) heaven or from [the] men is it?'And they reasoned in themselves, saying: If we should say, that it is from (the) heaven, he will say to us: "Wherefore did ye not believe him?"
21:26 But if we should say, that (it is) from [the] men; we fear the multitude; for John is to them as a prophet.'
21:27 And they answered, they said to Jesus: We know not.' And he said to them: Neither will I also tell you with what authority I did these things.
21:28 But what think ye? There was a man who had two sons: he came to the first, he said to him: "My son, go to-day, work in the vineyard."
21:29 And he answered, he said: "I (go), my lord." And he went not.
21:30 He came to the second, he said to him again thus. And he answered, he said: "I wish not:" but at last having repented, he went.
21:31 Which of the two did the will of his father?'They said: The last.' Jesus said to them: Verily I say to you, that the publicans and the harlots will go before you into the kingdom of God.
21:32 For John came to you in the road of [the] righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye saw, and ye did not repent at last for (the) believing him.
21:33 Hear another parable. There was a man, an owner of land, who planted a vineyard, and set a hedge round it, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower in it, and delivered it to husbandmen, and went into (the) foreign (land).
21:34 And when (the) time of the fruits approached, he sent his servants to the husbandmen to receive his fruits.
21:35 And the husbandmen took his servants, one indeed they beat, and another they killed, and another they stoned.
21:36 Again, he sent other servants 'more in number than the first: and they did to them again thus.
21:37 But at last he sent his son to them, saying: "They will reverence my son."
21:38 But the husbandmen having seen the son, said in themselves: "This is the heir; come, let is kill him, and take his inheritance."
21:39 And they took him, they cast him outside of the vineyard, and killed him.
21:40 If the lord of the vineyard should come, what will he do to those husbandmen?'
21:41 They said to him: He shall miserably destroy the miserable men, and he shall deliver the vineyard to other husbandmen, who will give his fruits to him in their time.'
21:42 And Jesus said to them: Did ye never read in the Scriptures, that the stone which the builders rejected, this was made for completion of (the) corner: this having been done by the Lord, and it is wonderful in our eyes?
21:43 Therefore I say to you, that the kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be given to another nation, which will produce its fruits.
21:44 And he who will fall upon this stone, it shall break him to pieces; and he indeed upon whom it will fall, it shall scatter him as dust.'
21:45 And the chief priests and the Pharisees having heard his parables, knew that he spoke (lit. said it) concerning them.
21:46 And they were seeking to lay hold on him, they feared the multitude, because he was to them as a prophet.
22:1 And Jesus answered them in parables, saying:
22:2 The kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a king, who made a marriage feast for his son,
22:3 and sent his servants to call for them who were invited into the marriage feast: and they wished not to come.
22:4 Again he sent servants. saying: "Say to them who were invited, that, lo, I prepared my dinner: my calves and the fatlings are killed. all (things) are prepared: come into the marriage feast.'
22:5 But they having made light (of it), went, one indeed to his land; and another to his merchandise:
22:6 and (the) rest laid hold on his servants, they reviled them, and killed them.
22:7 But the king was angry; and sent his army, he destroyed those murderers, and burnt their city with [the] fire.
22:8 Then he said to his servants: "The marriage feast indeed is prepared, but they who were invited were not worthy:
22:9 but go forth to the crossings (lit. places of walking) of the roads, and them whom ye will find invite into the marriage feast."
22:10 And those servants having come forth on the roads, gathered all whom they found, them who were bad and them who were good: and the marriage feast was filled with the guests.
22:11 But the king having come in to see the guests, saw a man there not clothed with (the) raiment of the marriage feast:
22:12 and he said to him: "My friend, how camest thou in hither, not clothed with (the) raiment of the marriage feast?" And he was speechless.
22:13 Then the king said to the ministers: "Bind this (one), hand and foot, cast him to the outer darkness; the place in which will be (the) weeping and (the) gnashing of the teeth."
22:14 For there are many invited; few are the chosen.'
22:15 Then the Pharisees went, they took counsel against him, that they might ensnare him by word.
22:16 And they sent their disciples to him with the Herodians, saying: (The) teacher, we know that thou (art) true, and the road of God thou (art) teaching in truth, and carest not for any one: for thou regardest not (the) person of men.
22:17 Say then to us, what thinkest thou? is it lawful to give tax to (the) king or not?'
22:18 But Jesus having known their wickedness, said: Wherefore tempt ye me, [the] hypocrites?
22:19 Shew me (the) coin of the tax.' And they brought to him a stater.
22:20 And Jesus said to them: Whose is this image and these writings?'
22:21 They said to him: (The) king's are they.' Then he said to them: Give (the) king's (things) to (the) king, and give God's (things) to God.'
22:22 And having heard they wondered, and they left him, they went (away).
22:23 And in that day came to him Sadducees, who say that there is not to be resurrection: and they asked him,
22:24 saying. (The) teacher, Moses said to us, that if one should die, having no son, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.
22:25 There were, then, seven brothers with us: and the first, having taken (a wife), died, and he had no seed, he left his wife to his brother;
22:26 thus again the second, and the third, unto the seventh.
22:27 And at (the) end of them all, died the woman also.
22:28 In the resurrection, then, of whom is she to be wife among the seven? for they all took her.'
22:29 But Jesus answered, he said to them: Ye err, ye know not the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
22:30 For in the resurrection they take not, nor are taken (to wife), but they are to be as the angels of God in (the) heaven.
22:31 But concerning the resurrection of the dead, did ye not read that which was said to you by God, saying:"
22:32 I am God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob?" God is not (the God) of the dead, but of the living.'
22:33 And the multitudes indeed having heard, wondered at his teaching.
22:34 But the Pharisees having heard that he put the Sadducees to silence, gathered together.
22:35 And one of them being a lawyer, asked him, tempting him:
22:36 (The) teacher, what is the great commandment which is in. the law?'
22:37 And he said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God from all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy thoughts.
22:38 This is the great and first commandment.
22:39 The second is like to this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
22:40 On these two commandments the law and the prophets were hung.'
22:41 And the Pharisees having gathered together, Jesus asked them:'
22:42 What think ye concerning Christ? of whom is he (the) son?'They said to him:'(The) son of David.'
22:43 Jesus said to them: How then doth David in the Spirit call him "my Lord," saying:"
22:44 The Lord said to my Lord: Sit thou on my right hand, until I put thine enemies below thy feet?'"
22:45 If then David call him "my Lord," how is he his son?'
22:46 And no one could answer him a word, nor did any one venture to ask him (a question) from that day.
23:1 Then Jesus spake to the multitudes and his disciples, saying:
23:2 The scribes and the Pharisees sat in the seat of Moses.
23:3 All things which they will say to you, do them, and keep them: but do not according to their works; for they say them, and they do them not.
23:4 Yea, they bind heavy burdens and place them upon (the) shoulder of [the] men; but they (themselves) wish not to move them with their finger.
23:5 But all their works they do that [the] men may see them: for they broaden their phylacteries, and they make (the) hems of their garments to be enlarged,
23:6 and they love the first places in the feasts, and the first places on the seats in the synagogues,
23:7 and the salutations in the market-places, that [the] men may call them "Rabbi."
23:8 But be not ye called "Rabbi:" for one is your teacher, and ye all are brothers.
23:9 And call not (any) as father to you upon the earth: for one is your father, who is in the heavens.
23:10 Nor call (any) scribe to you: for one is your scribe, Christ.
23:11 But the great (one) who is among you shall be minister to you.
23:12 And he who will exalt himself will be humiliated, and he who will humiliate himself will be exalted.
23:13
23:14 And woe to you [the] scribes and [the] Pharisees, [the] hypocrites! because ye shut the kingdom of the heavens before [the] men: for ye come not in (yourselves), nor they who come, do you permit them to come in. * So through out
23:15 Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye go round (the) sea, and that which is dry, to make a proselyte; and if he should be made, ye make him son of Geenna twofold (more) than yourselves.
23:16 Woe to you, [the] blind guides, who say, that he who will swear by the temple, it is nothing; but he who will swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor.
23:17 [The] fools and blind: for which is greater, the gold, or the temple which halloweth the gold?
23:18 And he who will swear by the altar, it is nothing; but he who will swear by the gift which is upon it, he is a debtor.
23:19 [The] fools and blind: for what is greater, the gift, or the altar which halloweth the gift?
23:20 He, then, who sweareth by the altar, swore by it, and everything which is upon it.
23:21 And he who sweareth by the temple, swore by it, and him who dwelleth in it.
23:22 And he who sweareth by (the) heaven, swore by the throne of God, and him who sitteth upon it
23:23 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye give (the) tithe of the mint and the anise and the cummin, and ye left (out) the weighty things of the law --[the] judgement and [the] pity and [the] faith: these it was right that ye should do, and the others that ye should not leave (out).
23:24 [The] blind guides, who strain out the gnat, and swallow the camel.
23:25 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites Because ye cleanse outside of the cup and the platter, but inside of them (is) full of extortion and uncleanness.
23:26 [The] blind Pharisee, cleanse inside of the cup first, and the platter, that outside of them may be cleansed.
23:27 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites Ye are like to sepulchres smeared with lime: outside of them, indeed, they appear beautiful, but inside of them (is) full of bones of dead (men) and all uncleanness.
23:28 Thus ye also, outside of you, indeed, ye appear before [the] men as righteous, but inside of you (is) full of hypocrisy and all iniquity.
23:29 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and ye garnish the caves of the righteous,
23:30 and ye say, that if we had been in the days of our fathers, we should not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
23:31 So that ye bear witness against yourselves, that ye (are the) sons of them who slew the prophets.
23:32 And ye also, fill (ye) up (the) measure of your fathers.
23:33 [The] serpents, offspring of [the] vipers! How will ye be able to flee from the judgement of the Geenna?
23:34 Therefore lo, I will send to you prophets and wise scribes: and ye shall kill (some) of them; and ye shall crucify (them), scourging them in your synagogues, and ye shall persecute them from city to city:
23:35 that all righteous blood which was shed upon the earth may come upon you, from (the) blood of Abel the righteous, unto (the) blood of Zacharias (the) son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.
23:36 Verily I say to you, that all these things shall come upon this generation.
23:37 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who killeth the prophets, and who stoneth them who were sent to her! Many times I wished to gather thy sons as a bird gathereth in his brood under his wings, and ye wished not.
23:38 Lo, I will leave your house to you.
23:39 For I say to you, that ye shall not see me from now, until ye say, that blessed is he who cometh in (the) name of the Lord.'
24:1 And Jesus having come out of the temple was walking (away); and his disciples came to him, shewing him the buildings of the temple.
24:2 But he answered, he said to them: Ye see all these things: verily I say to you, that a stone shall not be left upon a stone here, (which) will not be pulled down.'
24:3 And (as he is) sitting upon the mountain of the Olives, his disciples came to him apart alone, saying:'Say to us, when these things shall be? and what is the sign of thy coining, and (the) end of this age?'
24:4 And Jesus answered, he said to them: Take heed, let it not (be) that one lead you astray.
24:5 For many shall come in my name, saying, that I am Christ; and shall lead many astray.
24:6 And ye hearing of wars and rumours of war, take heed, be not troubled: for it is necessary that they happen; but (the) end is not yet.
24:7 For nation shall rise upon nation, and kingdom upon kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes and famines and deaths in different places.
24:8 But all these things are (the) beginning of the pangs.
24:9 Then shall they deliver you into tribulation, and they shall kill you: and ye shall become hated by all the nations because of my name.
24:10 Then shall many be deserted, and they shall deliver (up) one another, and they shall hate one another.
24:11 And many false prophets shall rise, and shall lead many astray.
24:12 And because of (the) abundance of [the] iniquity (the) love of many shall be weighed down.
24:13 But he who will hold on until the end (lit. out), this (one) will be saved.
24:14 And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole world for a witness to all the nations; then shall come the end.
24:15 And if ye see the abomination of (the) desert, which he said by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place--he who readeth, let him understand
24:16 then they who are in Judea, let them flee upon the mountains:
24:17 and he who is upon (the) housetop, make him not come down to take away the things which are in his house:
24:18 and he who is in (the) field, make him not return back to take away his garment.
24:19 But woe to them who are with child, and them who give suck in those days!
24:20 And pray that your flight may not be in (the) winter, nor on (the) sabbath.
24:21 For there (shall) be great tribulation in that time: there was not like it from (the) beginning of the world until now, nor shall there be again.
24:22 And except that those days became few no flesh would have been saved: but because of the chosen those days shall become few.
24:23 Then if one should say to you that, lo, Christ is here, or he is there, believe them not.
24:24 For false Christs shall rise, and false prophets, and they shall show (lit. give) great signs and wonders: so that, if it were possible, even my chosen might be led astray.
24:25 Behold, I said to you before.
24:26 If, then, they should say to you that, lo, he is in (the) desert, go not forth: lo, he is in the chambers, believe them not.
24:27 For as the lightning which cometh forth in the east, and manifesteth itself in the west, this is as (the) coming of (the) Son of (the) man.
24:28 The place in which the carcase is, the eagles assemble thither.
24:29 But immediately after the tribulation of those days, (the) sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give his light, and the stars shall fall down from (the) heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
24:30 Then shall appear the sign of (the) Son of (the) man in (the) heaven: and then all the tribes of (the) earth shall wail, and they shall see (the) Son of (the) man coming upon the clouds of (the) heaven with power and great glory.
24:31 And he shall send his angels with a great trumpet, and they shall gather his chosen from the four winds, from one end (lit. their ends) of the heavens unto the other (lit. their ends).
24:32 From the fig-tree learn the parable: if now her branches are tender, and her leaves unloose, ye know that the summer approacheth;
24:33 thus ye also, if ye should see all these things, know that it approacheth at the doors.
24:34 Verily I say to you, that this generation shall not pass away, until all these things be accomplished.
24:35 (The) heaven and the earth will pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
24:36 Concerning that day and the hour no one knoweth, nor the angels of the heavens, except (the) Father alone.
24:37 For as the days of Noe, thus will it be in (the) coming of (the) Son of (the) man.
24:38 For as they were in the days which were before the flood: eating and drinking, taking wives and taking husbands, until the day in which Noe went into the ark,
24:39 and they knew not until the flood came, and took away every one: thus will it be in (the) coining of (the) Son of (the) man.
24:40 Then two being in (the) field; one shall be taken away, and one shall be left.
24:41 Two women grinding in a mill: one shall be taken away, and one shall be left.
24:42 Watch then: because ye know not in what day your Lord shall come.
24:43 But this know, that if the owner-of-a-house had known in what hour the robber is coining to him, he would have watched, that he should not permit him to take his house.
24:44 Therefore be ye also prepared, because in the hour which ye know not the Son of man is coining.
24:45 Who then is the faithful servant and wise, whom his Lord will set over his servants, to give to them their food in (the) time of giving it?
24:46 Blessed is that servant, if his Lord should come and find him doing thus.
24:47 Verily I say to you, that he will set him over all which he hath.
24:48 If that wicked servant should say in his heart: "My Lord will delay;"
24:49 and he begin to beat his fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunken:
24:50 the Lord of that servant shall come in the day which he expects not, and in the hour which he knows not,
24:51 and he shall cut him asunder, and he shall set his portion with the hypocrites, the place in which will be (the) weeping and (the) gnashing of the teeth.
25:1 Then the kingdom of the heavens is like to ten virgins, who took their lamps, they came forth to meet the bridegroom.
25:2 And there were five foolish among them, and five wise.
25:3 For the foolish having taken their lamps took not away oil with them:
25:4 but the wise took away oil in their vessels with their lamps.
25:5 Now the bridegroom having delayed, they all slumbered and they slept.
25:6 But midnight having come, there was a cry: "Lo, the bridegroom! Rise, come forth to meet him."
25:7 Then all those virgins rose and they trimmed their lamps.
25:8 And the foolish said to the wise: "Give to us of your oil, otherwise our lamps will be quenched."
25:9 But the wise answered, saying: (Not so), lest haply it should not suffice for us and you: go ye rather to them who sell, and buy for yourselves."
25:10 And having gone that they might buy, the bridegroom came; and they who were prepared went with him into the marriage feast: and the door was shut.
25:11 And at last came (the) rest of the virgins, saying:"Our Lord, our Lord, open to us."
25:12 But he answered, he said: "Verily I say to you, that I know you not."
25:13 Watch then, because ye know not the day, nor the hour.
25:14 For as a man being about to go to (the) foreign (land), called his servants, and delivered what he had to them.
25:15 To one indeed he gave five talents, and to one he gave two, and to another he gave one; each according to his power; and he went to (the) foreign (land).
25:16 And he who received the five talents went, he worked with them, and got other five.
25:17 Thus again he who received the two got other two.
25:18 But he who received the one, having gone, dug the (lit. an) earth, and hid (the) silver of his Lord.
25:19 Now after a long time came the Lord of those servants, and reckoned with them.
25:20 And he who received the five talents came, he brought other five talents, saying: "my Lord, thou gavest to me five talents: lo, I got other five talents."
25:21 And his Lord said to him: "Well, [the] good and faithful servant, since thou wast faithful in few things, I shall set thee over great things: go into (the) joy of thy Lord."
25:22 And he who received the two talents came, he said: "my Lord, two talents it is which thou gavest to me: lo, I got other two."
25:23 And his Lord said to him: "Well, [the] good and faithful servant, since thou wast faithful in few things, I shall set thee over great things: go into (the) joy of thy Lord."
25:24 And he also who received the (one) talent came, he said: "my Lord, I knew thee, that thou (art) a hard man, reaping that which thou sowedst not, and gathering in that which thou scatteredst not:
25:25 and I feared, I went, I hid thy talent in the earth: lo, (here is) that which is thine from me."
25:26 His Lord answered, he said: "[The] wicked and slothful servant, if thou knowest that I reap that which I sowed not, and gather in that which I scattered not;
25:27 was it not right then for thee to deliver my silver to the bankers, and if I should come I should have received that which is mine with its increase?
25:28 Take away then the talent from this (one), and give it to him of the ten talents.
25:29 For to every one who hath shall be given, and it shall be exceeding to him: but he who hath not, that which he hath shall be taken away from him.
25:30 And cast that unprofitable servant to the outer darkness, the place in which will be (the) weeping and (the) gnashing of the teeth."
25:31 But if (the) Son of (the) man should come in his glory, and all his angels with him, then he shall sit upon (the) throne of his glory:
25:32 and they shall gather before him all the nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd who separateth the sheep from the goats:
25:33 and the sheep indeed he shall set on his right hand, but the goats on his left hand.
25:34 Then (the) king shall say to them who are on his right hand: "Come to me, ye (lit. they) who are blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom which is prepared for you from (the) foundation of the world:
25:35 for I hungered, and ye fed me: I thirsted, and ye gave me to drink: I was a stranger, and ye received me to you:
25:36 I was naked, and ye covered me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in the prison, and ye came unto me."
25:37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying "Our Lord, when saw we thee hungry, and we fed thee? or thirsty, and we gave thee to drink?
25:38 or when saw we thee a stranger, and we received thee to us? or naked, and we covered thee?
25:39 or when saw we thee sick, or being in the prison, and we came unto thee?"
25:40 And the king shall answer , he shall say to them: "Verily I say to you, that inasmuch as ye did them to one of these least--my brothers, to me ye did them."
25:41 Then he shall say to the wicked who are on his left hand: "Go from me, [the] cursed, to the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels.
25:42 For I hungered, and ye fed me not: I thirsted, and ye gave me not to drink:
25:43 I was a stranger, and ye received me not to you: I was naked, and ye covered me not: I was sick, and ye visited me not: I was in the prison, ye came not unto me."
25:44 Then they shall also answer, saying: "Our Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or being in the prison, and we ministered not to thee?"
25:45 Then he shall answer them, saying: "Verily I say to you, that inasmuch as ye did them not to one of these least, neither to me did ye them."
25:46 And these shall go to eternal punishment; but the righteous to eternal life.'
26:1 And it came to pass (that) Jesus having finished all these words, said to his disciples:
26:2 Ye know that after two more days the Passover will be, and (the) Son of (the) man will be delivered to be crucified.'
26:3 Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled into the court of the chief priest whom they call Caiaphas;'
26:4 and they took counsel that they might lay hold on Jesus with subtilty, and kill him.
26:5 They were saying: Let us not do it in (the) feast, that there shall not be a tumult among the people.'
26:6 Now Jesus being in Bethany, in (the) house of Simon the leper,
26:7 a woman came to him, having a vessel of ointment, of great price, and she poured it upon his head, sitting at meat.
26:8 But the disciples having seen, murmured, saying: What is this waste?
26:9 For it was possible to sell this for much, and to give them to the poor.'
26:10 But Jesus having known (it), said to them: Wherefore trouble ye the woman? a good work she did to me.
26:11 For the poor are with you always, but I am not with you always.
26:12 For this (woman) cast this ointment upon my body for my burying.
26:13 Verily I say to you, that where this gospel will be preached in the whole world, that also which this woman did shall be spoken of for a memorial to her.'
26:14 Then went one of the twelve, whom they call Judas (the) Iscariot,' to the chief priests,
26:15 he said to them: What will ye give me, and I myself will deliver him to you? And they settled with him to give him thirty (pieces) of silver.
26:16 And from that time he was seeking for an opportunity that he might deliver him to them.
26:17 Now on the first day of (the) unleavened (bread) his disciples came to Jesus, saying: Where didst thou wish (us) to prepare the Passover for thee, to eat it?'
26:18 And he said to them: Go to this city to such a man, and say to him, that the Teacher said: "My time approached; I am to keep my Passover at thy house with my disciples."'
26:19 And the disciples did as Jesus said to them; and they prepared the Passover.
26:20 Now evening having come, he was sitting at meat with the twelve disciples;
26:21 and (as they are) eating, he said to them: Verily I say to you, that one of you will deliver me (up).'
26:22 And their heart being greatly grieved, they began, each of them, (to say): Is it I, my Lord?'
26:23 And he answered, he said: He who clipped his hand with me in the dish, this (one) will deliver me (up).
26:24 (The) Son of (the) man indeed will go, according as it is written concerning him: but woe to the man by whom (the) Son of (the) man will be delivered (up)! it were good for him (if) that man had not been born.'
26:25 Judas, who was to deliver him (up), answered him and said: Is it I, Rabbi?'He said to him: Thou saidst.'
26:26 And (as they are) eating, Jesus took bread, and having blessed it, he brake it; and having given it to his disciples, he said: Take, eat; for this is my body.'
26:27 And having taken a cup, and having given thanks, he gave it to them, saying: Take, drink of this, all;
26:28 for this is my blood of the new testament, which will be shed for many, for (the) forgiveness of their sins to them.
26:29 But I say to you: that I shall not drink henceforth of (the) fruit of this vine, until that day when I should drink it with you in the kingdom of my Father.'
26:30 And having blessed, they came out to the mountain of the Olives.
26:31 Then said Jesus to them: All ye will be offended in me this night: it is written, that I shall smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered.
26:32 But after my rising I will go before you to Galilee.'
26:33 But Peter answered, he said to him: If all will be offended in thee, I, however, shall not be offended.'
26:34 And Jesus said to him: Verily I say to thee, that in this night, before the cock crow, thou wilt deny me three times.'
26:35 And Peter said to him: Even if it should come about that I die with thee, I shall not deny thee.' And thus were saying all the other disciples.
26:36 Then he came with them to a field called Gethsemani,' and he said to his disciples: Sit here, until I go yonder and pray.'
26:37 And he took away Peter with him, and (the) two sons of Zebedee, and he began to be grieved and to be dismayed.
26:38 Then he said to them: My soul is grieved unto (the) death: abide here, and watch with me.'
26:39 And having gone forward a little, he threw himself upon his face, praying, and saying: 'My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.'
26:40 And having come to his disciples, he found them sleeping, and he said to Peter: Thus, could ye not watch with me for an hour?
26:41 Watch then, and pray, that ye come not into temptation: the spirit indeed is ready, (but) the flesh is weak.'
26:42 Again he went, he prayed (the) second time, saying: My Father, if it is possible that this cup should (not) pass from me except I drink it, let thy will be done.'
26:43 And he came again to his disciples, he found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
26:44 And he left them again, he went, he prayed the third time, saying this same word again.
26:45 Then he came to his disciples, he said to them: Sleep then, and rest yourselves: behold, the hour approached, and (the) Son of (the) man will be delivered into (the) hands of [the] sinners.
26:46 Rise, let us go; lo, he who will deliver me (up) approached.'
26:47 And he having spoken, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came with a great multitude, with swords and staves, from the chief priests and the elders of the people.
26:48 Now he who was to deliver him (up) gave to them a sign, saying: He whose mouth I will kiss is he, lay hold on him.'
26:49 And immediately he came to Jesus, he said to him: Hail, Rabbi;'and he kissed his mouth.
26:50 And Jesus said to him: `My friend, (do) that concerning which thou camest.' Then putting forth their hands upon Jesus they laid hold on him.
26:51 And lo, one of them who were with Jesus, stretched out his hand, he drew his sword, and struck at (the) servant of the high priest, he cut off his right ear.
26:52 Then said Jesus therefore to him: Put up again the sword into its place: for all who took sword will perish by (the) sword.
26:53 Or thoughtest thou, that it is possible for me to pray to my Father, and he would cause more than twelve legions of angels to come to me hither, now?
26:54 How then would the Scripture be fulfilled, that thus it must be? '
26:55 In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes: Came ye out as coming after a robber with swords and staves to lay hold on me? Was I not sitting daily in the temple to teach, and ye laid not hold on me? '
26:56 But all this was done, that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples left him, they fled.
26:57 And they laid hold on Jesus, they brought him to Caiaphas the chief priest, (to) the place whither the scribes and the elders of the people were assembling.
26:58 But Peter was walking after him afar off, unto the court of the chief priest, and having gone in, was sitting with the officers to see the end.
26:59 Now the chief priests and the whole council were seeking for false witness against Jesus, that they might kill him;
26:60 and they found not, many false witnesses having come. But at last two came,
26:61 saying This (man) said that it is possible for me to pull down the temple of God, and to build it in three days.'
26:62 And the chief priest arose, he said to him: Answerest thou nothing as to what these bear witness against thee?'
26:63 But Jesus was holding his peace. And the chief priest said to him: adjure thee by (the) living God, that thou say to us, that thou art Christ, (the) Son of (the) living God.'
26:64 Jesus said to him: Thou saidst: nevertheless I say to you, that henceforth ye shall see (the) Son of (the) man sitting at (the) right hand of [the] power, and coming upon the clouds of (the) heaven.'
26:65 Then the chief priest rent his garments, saying He blasphemed; we have not further need of witness: lo, now ye heard the blasphemy:
26:66 what then think ye?' And they answered, they said: 'He is worthy of (the) death.'
26:67 Then they spat in his face, and struck him, and beat him,
26:68 saying: 'Prophesy to us, Christ, who beat thee?'
26:69 Now Peter was sitting outside in the court: and a maidservant came to him, saying: Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilaean.'
26:70 But he was denying before them all, saying: 'I know not what thou saidst.'
26:71 And he having come out to the porch another (woman) saw him, and said to them who were there: 'He also was with Jesus of Nazareth (lit. the Nazôreos).'
26:72 Again he denied with an oath: 'I know not this man.'
26:73 And after another little (time) they who stood (by) came, they said to Peter: 'Truly thou also (art) one of them; for thy speech manifesteth thee.'
26:74 Then he began to curse and to swear: I know not this man.' And immediately a cock crew.
26:75 And Peter remembered the word which Jesus said to him: Before a cock crow thou wilt deny me three times.' And having come out he wept a bitter weeping.
27:1 Now morning having come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus, so that they might kill him.
27:2 And having bound him, they took him away, they delivered him to Pilate the governor.
27:3 Then Judas, who delivered him (up), having seen that he was condemned, having repented, returned the thirty (pieces) of silver to the chief priests and the elders,
27:4 saying: I sinned, because I delivered (up) righteous blood.' But they said: What (is that) to us? thou shalt suffice for (it).'
27:5 And he cast forth the silver (pieces) into the temple, he went, he strangled himself.
27:6 And the chief priests, having taken the silver (pieces), said: It is not lawful to cast them to the sacred-treasury, because it is (the) price of blood.'
27:7 And having taken counsel, they bought with them the field of the potter, for a burial place for the strangers.
27:8 Therefore they called (the) name of that field: (The) field of the blood' until to-day.
27:9 Then was fulfilled that which he spake by Jeremias the prophet, saying: They took the thirty (pieces) of silver, the price of him whom (the) sons of Israel priced,
27:10 and they gave them for (the) field of the potter, according as the Lord commanded me.'
27:11 Now Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying: Art thou (the) king of the Jews? 'And Jesus said: Thou saidst.'
27:12 And while the chief priests and the elders were causing him to be accused, he answered not anything.
27:13 Then Pilate said to him: Hearest thou not how much witness is borne against thee?'
27:14 And he answered him not with any word; so that the governor wondered greatly.
27:15 Now at (the) feast it was (the) custom of the governor to release one of them who were bound to the multitude, him whom they wish.
27:16 And they had one bound at that time, who was (lit. is) a robber, called Barabbas.'
27:17 They having assembled together, Pilate said to them: Whom wish ye that I release to you? Barabbas or Jesus who is called "Christ?"
27:18 For he was knowing that they delivered him (up) because of envy.
27:19 And (as he is) sitting on the judgement seat, his wife sent to him, saying: Do nothing to that righteous man, for I suffered much because of him this night in (the) dream.'
27:20 Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes that they should ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.
27:21 The governor then answered, he said to them: Whom wish ye that I release to you of these two?'And they said: Barabbas.'
27:22 Pilate said to them: What shall (lit. will) I do to Jesus who is called "Christ?" 'They all said: Let him be crucified.'
27:23 The governor said to them: Why, what evil did he?' But they were crying out the more, saying: Crucify him.'
27:24 So Pilate having seen that he will gain nothing, but rather (that) a tumult will be made, took water, washed his hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent from (the) blood of this righteous (man): ye shall suffice for (it).'
27:25 And all the people answered, they (lit. he) said: `His blood (shall be) upon us, and upon our sons.'
27:26 Then he released Barabbas to them: but having scourged Jesus he delivered him to be crucified.
27:27 Then the soldiers of the governor took away Jesus into the Prætorium; they gathered the whole band upon him.
27:28 And having stripped him, they clothed him with a scarlet robe.
27:29 And they plaited a crown of thorns, they placed it upon his head, and they put a reed in his right hand; and they threw themselves upon their knees before him, mocking him, saying: Hail, (the) king of the Jews!'
27:30 And having spit in his face, they took away the reed, they struck his head.
27:31 And having finished mocking him, they stripped him of the robe, they clothed him with his garments, and took him away to be crucified.
27:32 And coming out they found a man--a Cyrenian whose name was (lit. is) Simon: this (one) they compelled to go (with them) that he might take up his cross.
27:33 And having come to a place which they call Golgotha,' which is the place of the skull,
27:34 they gave wine to him mingled with gall: and having tasted he wished not to drink.
27:35 And having crucified him, they divided his garments among them, having cast lot for them.
27:36 And they were sitting, guarding him there.
27:37 And they wrote his accusation above his head, written thus: 'This is (the) king of the Jews.'
27:38 Then they crucified two robbers also with him, one on his right hand, and one on his left hand.
27:39 And they who passed by were blaspheming him, shaking their head,
27:40 saying: Thou (lit. he) who will destroy the temple of God, and build it in three days,--save thyself. If thou art (the) Son of God come down from the tree (lit. wood).'
27:41 This is how (lit. as) the chief priests with the scribes and the elders mocked him, saying:
27:42 He saved others; it is not possible for him to save himself. If (he) is (the) king of Israel, let him come down now from the tree, and let us believe him.
27:43 If he trusted in God, let him save him, if he wish (for) him: for he said that I am (the) Son of God.'
27:44 And this the robbers also were saying, who were crucified with him, reproaching him.
27:45 From (the) sixth hour there was (the) darkness upon all (the) land until (the) ninth hour.
27:46 And (the) ninth hour having come, Jesus cried out with a great cry, saying: Eloi eloi lema sabakthani? 'which is this, My God, my God, wherefore didst thou leave me?'
27:47 And some of them who stood there, having heard, were saying: He called to Elias.'
27:48 And immediately one of them ran, took a sponge, filled it with vinegar, and pierced (it) on (lit. to) a reed, they gave him to drink.
27:49 And (the) rest were saying: Let it (be); and let us see if (lit. that) Elias cometh and saveth him.'
27:50 And Jesus cried out again with a great cry, he gave (up) the spirit.
27:51 And lo, the veil of the temple was broken from (the) top to (the) bottom; it (was) made two (pieces): and the earth quaked; and the rocks were broken;
27:52 and the sepulchres opened; and many bodies of them who slept, of the saints, rose;
27:53 and having come out of the sepulchres after his rising, went into the holy city, and manifested themselves to many.
27:54 Now the centurion, and they who were with him, guarding Jesus, having seen the earthquake, and the things which were done, feared greatly, saying: Truly this was (the) Son of God.'
27:55 And many women were there, seeing afar off, these were they who walked after Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him:
27:56 these--among whom was Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of James, and (the) mother of Joseph, and (the) mother of (the) sons of Zebedee.
27:57 And evening having come, a rich man from AriMatthewheas came, whose name was (lit. is) Joseph. This (man) also had been a disciple of Jesus:
27:58 this (man) having come to Pilate, asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded to give it.
27:59 And Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
27:60 and laid it in his new sepulchre, which he hewed-out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the mouth of the sepulchre, he departed.
27:61 And Mary the Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting before the sepulchre.
27:62 Now on the (lit. his) morrow, which is (the day) after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees assembled to Pilate,
27:63 saying: Our lord, we remembered that that deceiver said, while living, that after three days I will rise.
27:64 Command then, to make sure the sepulchre until the third day, lest his disciples come and take him away by stealth, and say to the people, that he rose from the dead: and the last error (will be) worse for us than the first.'
27:65 And Pilate said to them: Ye have guards: go, make it sure as ye know (how to make) it.'
27:66 So they went, they made sure the sepulchre, they sealed it, the guard (being) with (them).
28:1 Now in the night (lit. Now evening) of the sabbaths, being morning of (the) first (lit, to (the) one) of the sabbaths, Mary the Magdalene came and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.
28:2 And lo, there was a great earthquake; an angel of the Lord came down from (the) heaven, and rolled the stone from the mouth of the sepulchre, and was sitting upon it.
28:3 And his form was (imperf.) as lightning, and his raiment white as snow:
28:4 and for fear of him (lit. his fear) they who guard quaked, and were as dead men.
28:5 And the angel answered, he said to the women: 'Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek for Jesus who was crucified.
28:6 He is not here; for he rose, as he said. Come see the place in which he was laid.
28:7 And quickly go, say to his disciples, that he rose from the dead; and lo, he will go before you to Galilee; ye will see him there: behold, I told (lit. said) you.'
28:8 And they went quickly from the sepulchre in fear and great joy, and were running to tell his disciples.
28:9 And behold, Jesus met them, saying: All hail!' And they laid hold on his feet, and worshipped him.
28:10 Then Jesus said to them: Fear not: go, tell my brothers, that they go to Galilee, and see me there.'
28:11 They having gone, lo, some of the guards came to the city, they told the chief priests all things which were done.
28:12 And having assembled with the elders, and taking counsel, they took suitable money, they gave it (lit. them) to the soldiers,
28:13 (saying:) 'Say that his disciples having come by night, took him away by stealth, and while we sleep.
28:14 And if the governor hear this word, we shall persuade him, and shall rid you of care.'
28:15 So they having taken the silver pieces, did as they were taught: and this word spread abroad among the Jews until to-day.
28:16 The eleven disciples went up to Galilee, upon the mountain which Jesus appointed to them.
28:17 And having seen him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.
28:18 And Jesus having come, spake to them, saying: All authority was given me in (the) heaven and on the earth.
28:19 Go then, teach all nations, baptising them into (the) name of (the) Father and (the) Son and the Holy Spirit:
28:20 teaching them to keep all things which I ordered you: and behold, I am with you all the days unto (the) end of the ages.'
28:21