1:1 (The) beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, (the) Son of God.
1:2 According as it is written in Esaias the prophet: Lo, I will send (the) messenger before thy face, who will prepare thy road before thee;
1:3 (the) cry of him who crieth out in (the) desert: "Prepare (the) road of the Lord, make straight his paths."'
1:4 And John the Baptist was in (the) desert, and preaching a baptism of repentance for (lit. in) a forgiveness of sins.
1:5 And there were coining forth to him they of all Judea-country, and all they of Jerusalem; and they were being baptised by him in the Jordan-river, confessing their sins.
1:6 And John was (imperf.) clothed with camel's hair, and girt with a girdle of leather upon his loins, and he ate (imperf.) locust and honey of (the) field.
1:7 And he was preaching, saying: He who is stronger than I cometh after me, he (of) whom I am not worthy to stoop down to unloose a latchet of his shoe.
1:8 I baptised you in water: but he will baptise you in the (lit. a) Holy Spirit.
1:9 And it came to pass in those days, (that) Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptised in the Jordan by John.
1:10 And immediately coming up from the water, he saw the heavens rent, and the Spirit came down upon him as a dove:
1:11 and there was (imperf.) a voice from the heavens:'Thou art my Son, my beloved, in whom I was well pleased.'
1:12 And immediately the Spirit drove him forth to (the) desert.
1:13 And he was (imperf.) in (the) desert forty days and nights, Satan tempting him; and he was (imperf.) with the wild beasts; and the angels were ministering to him.
1:14 Now after that John was delivered (up), Jesus came to Galilee, preaching the gospel of God,
1:15 and saying: 'The time was fulfilled, and the kingdom of God approached: repent, and believe the gospel.'
1:16 And having passed by (the) sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew (the) brother of Simon casting net into the sea: because they were fishers.
1:17 And Jesus said to them: Come, walk after me, and I (will) make you fishers, catchers of men.'
1:18 And they left the nets, they immediately walked after him.
1:19 And having passed on a little further, he saw James (the) son of Zebedee, and John his brother; and they also being in the ship, preparing their nets.
1:20 And immediately he called them: and they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired-servants, they went (away), they walked after him.
1:21 And they went into Kapharnaum; and he was teaching immediately on the sabbaths in the synagogues.
1:22 And they were wondering at his teaching: for he was teaching them as having his authority, and not as the scribes.
1:23 And immediately there was (imperf.) a man in the synagogue, being with (lit. in) an unclean spirit; and he cried out,
1:24 saying: What (hast) thou with us, Jesus the Nazarene? camest thou to destroy us? We know thee who thou (art), the Holy (One) of God.'
1:25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying: Be silenced, and come out of him.'
1:26 And the unclean spirit convulsed him, and cried out with a great cry, he came from him.
1:27 And they all feared, so that they sought with one another, saying: What is this? it is a new teaching; because with authority he commandeth the unclean spirits, they obey him.'
1:28 And his fame spread abroad in all the region of Galilee round about.
1:29 And immediately having come from the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, James and John being with them.
1:30 Now (the) mother-in-law of Simon was lying (lit. sleeping) sick-of-a-fever; and immediately they told him concerning her:
1:31 and he came, he raised her up, having taken hold of her hand; and the fever left her, and she was ministering to them.
1:32 And evening having come, when (the) sun set, they brought to him every one who was afflicted, and them with whom were the demons.
1:33 And the whole city assembled at the door.
1:34 And he healed many who were afflicted in many kinds of sickness, and cast out many demons; and he was not permitting the demons to speak, because they were [not] knowing him that he was (lit. is) Christ.
1:35 And having risen in the morning very early, he came forth to a desert place, and was praying there.
1:36 And Simon and they who were with him ran after him;
1:37 and having found him, they said to him: They all seek for thee.'
1:38 And he said to them: Let us go to another place, to the towns which are near to us, that we may preach there also; for I came to this thing.'
1:39 And he came to preach in their synagogues in all Galilee, and (is) casting (out) the demons.
1:40 And a leper came to him, beseeching him, and throwing himself upon his knees, saying If thou wishest, it is possible for thee to cleanse me.
1:41 And he had compassion upon him, he stretched out his hand, he touched him, and said to him: I wish, be cleansed.'
1:42 And immediately the leprosy went from him, and he was cleansed.
1:43 And having sternly-charged him, immediately he sent him away,
1:44 and said to him: Take heed, shew (it) not to any one: but go shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift for thy cleansing which Moses commanded, for a witness to them.
1:45 But he having come forth, began to publish (it) much, and to spread abroad his word, so that (Jesus) could not come into a city openly, but was (imperf.) in desert roads: and they were coming to him from all places.
2:1 And he came again into Kapharnaum after some days. They heard that he is within a house:
2:2 and many assembled thither, so that the house no longer held (them), not even at the door: and he spake to them the word.
2:3 And they brought to him one, paralysed, four men carrying him.
2:4 And having not been able, to bring him in because of the multitude, they went upon (the) housetop, they uncovered the roof of the house in which he was (imperf.): and having broken (it) up, they let down the bed on which the paralysed lay (lit. slept).
2:5 And Jesus, having seen their faith, said to the paralysed: My son, thy sins are forgiven thee.'
2:6 But there were some of the scribes there sitting, and they were reasoning in their heart:
2:7 Wherefore doth this (man) thus blaspheme? For whom is it possible to forgive sin except the one alone--God?'
2:8 And immediately Jesus knew in his spirit, that they reason thus within themselves, he said to them: 'Wherefore reason ye these (things) in your hearts?
2:9 What is easy to say to the paralysed: "Thy sins are forgiven thee," or to say: "Rise, take up thy bed, and go?"
2:10 That ye may know that (the) Son of (the) man hath (the) authority upon the earth to forgive sin--he said to the paralysed
2:11 to thee I say: "Rise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house."'
2:12 And immediately he rose, he took up his bed, and came out before every one, so that they all wondered, and glorified God, saying: 'We never saw it (lit. being) thus.'
2:13 And he came forth to (the) sea; and all the multitude was coming to him, and he was teaching them.
2:14 And passing by he saw Levi (the son) of Alpheus sitting at the custom-house, and he said to him: Walk after me.' And he rose, he walked after him.
2:15 And it came to pass, (as he is) sitting-at-meat in his house, (that) there were many publicans and sinners, they were sitting-at-meat with Jesus and his disciples, there were many. And the scribes and the Pharisees were walking after him;
2:16 and having seen that he eateth with the publicans and the sinners, they were saying to his disciples: Wherefore doth your teacher eat and drink with the publicans and the sinners?
2:17 And Jesus having heard, said to them They who are strong have not need of the physician, but they who are diseased: for I came not to invite the righteous, but the sinners.'
2:18 And the disciples of John and those of the Pharisees were fasting: and they came, they said to him: Wherefore (do) the disciples of John and those of the Pharisees fast, but thine fast not?'
2:19 And Jesus answered, he said to them: Is it possible to make (the) sons of the bridegroom fast, while the bridegroom is with them? All (the) time that the bridegroom is with them, it is not possible for them to fast.
2:20 But days come when the bridegroom should be taken away from them, then they will fast in those days.
2:21 For no one putteth (lit. throweth) a piece of new cloth to an old garment: otherwise the new taketh away the filling-up of the old, and a rent becometh worse.
2:22 And they do not put (lit. throw) new wine into old bottles: otherwise the wine rendeth the bottles, and the wine perisheth, and the bottles: but they put new wine into new bottles.'
2:23 And it came to pass (that) he walked on the sabbaths through the cornfields; and his disciples began, (while) walking, to pluck ears-of-corn.
2:24 And the Pharisees were saying to him: 'See, what do they on the sabbaths? it is not lawful to do it.'
2:25 And he was saying to them: 'Did ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was hungry, and they who were with him?
2:26 How he went into the house of God, in time of Abiathar the chief priest, and ate the shewhread, which it was not lawful for him to cat except (for) the priests alone, and gave to them also who were (imperf) with him there.'
2:27 And he said to them: The sabbath was made because of the man, and not the man because of the sabbath
2:28 so that the Lord of the sabbath is (the) Son of (the) man.'
3:1 And he came again into their synagogue; and there was a man there whose hand was (lit. is) withered.
3:2 And they were observing him, whether he will heal him on the sabbaths; that they might accuse him.
3:3 And he said to the man whose hand was (lit. is) withered: Rise in (the) midst.'
3:4 And he said to them: 'Is it lawful to do good on the sabbaths, or to do evil? to save life (lit. a soul) or to kill?' But they held their peace.
3:5 And having looked upon them with indignation, being grieved at the hardness of their heart, he said to the man: I Stretch out thy hand.' And having stretched it out, his hand was cured.
3:6 And the chief priests having come out immediately, took counsel with the Herodians against him, that they might destroy him.
3:7 And Jesus and his disciples withdrew to (the) mountain: and a great multitude of Galilee, and Judea,
3:8 and Jerusalem, and Idumæa, and beyond the Jordan, and a great multitude also from them of Tyre and Sidon, hearing the things which he was doing, came to him.
3:9 And he said to his disciples, that a ship might wait on him because of the multitude, that they might not throng him:
3:10 for he was healing many; so that all with whom were plagues came upon him and touched him.
3:11 and the unclean spirits, if they see him, throw themselves down before him, and were crying out, saying: 'Thou art (the) Son of God.'
3:12 And he was charging them much, that they should not make him known.
3:13 And he went up on the mountain, and called whom he himself was wishing: and they went to him.
3:14 And he appointed twelve, whom he named 'the Apostles,' that they might stay with him, and that he might send them to preach,
3:15 and to have (the) authority to cast out the demons:
3:16 and he gave a name to Simon: Peter;'
3:17 and James (the) son of Zebedee, and John (the) brother of James; and he gave names to them: Boanêrges; which is this: the sons of the thunder:'
3:18 Andrew, and Philip; Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James (the son) of Alphæus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Kananeos,
3:19 and Judas (the) Iscariot, who delivered him (up).
3:20 And he came into a house. And the multitude assembled again, so that they could not even eat bread.
3:21 And his (friends) having heard, came forth to lay hold on him: for they were saying, that he was mad.
3:22 And the scribes who came from Jerusalem were saying, that Belzebul is with him, and that by (lit. in the) ruler of the demons he cast out the demons.
3:23 And he called them, he was saying to them in parables: How is it possible that Satan cast out Satan?
3:24 And if a kingdom be divided against itself, it is not possible that that kingdom stand.
3:25 And if a house be divided against itself, it is not possible that that house stand.
3:26 And if Satan rose upon himself, and was divided, it is not possible for him to stand, but he hath an end.
3:27 But it is not possible that any one enter (the) house of the strong man, and spoil his goods, except he bind the strong man first; and then spoil his house.
3:28 Verily I say to you, that all things shall be forgiven the sons of [the] men, the sins and all the blasphemies which they will blaspheme:
3:29 but he who will blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath not forgiveness for ever, but is in danger of eternal sin:'
3:30 because they were saying, that there is an unclean spirit with him.
3:31 And his mother and his brothers came; and they stood outside, and they sent to him, calling him.
3:32 And the multitude was sitting around him; and they said to him: Lo, thy mother and thy brothers outside (are) seeking for thee.'
3:33 And having answered them, he said: 'Lo, my mother and my brothers!'
3:34 And having looked upon them who sat around him, he said: 'Lo, my mother and my brothers!
3:35 He who will do the will of God, this is my brother, and my sister, and my mother.'
4:1 And again he began to teach by (the) sea. And a great multitude assembled to him, so that he entered into the ship, and sat in (the) sea by (lit. on) the shore.
4:2 And he was teaching them many (things) in parables, and he was saying to them in his teaching:
4:3 Hear: lo, he who soweth came:
4:4 and it came to pass in his sowing, that (lit. and) one indeed fell by the road, and the birds came, they ate it.
4:5 And another fell upon the rocky place, where there is not much earth; and immediately it grew up, because that it had not depth of earth:
4:6 and when (the) sun sprang up, it was scorched; and because that it had not root it withered.
4:7 And another fell upon the thorns, and the thorns having come up, choked it, and it yielded not fruit.
4:8 And others fell on good earth, and yielded fruit, coming up, it flourished; and one brought (forth) thirty, another sixty, another a hundred.'
4:9 And he was saying: He who hath an ear to hear, let him hear.'
4:10 And having become alone, they who were around him were beseeching him, with the twelve, concerning the parables.
4:11 And he was saying to them: 'To you are given the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but (as for) them who are outside, all is done to them in parables:
4:12 that seeing they may see, and not perceive (lit. see); and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest haply they should return and be forgiven.'
4:13 And he said to them: 'Do ye not know this parable? and how will ye know all other parables?
4:14 He who sowed, sowed the word.
4:15 And these are they who are by the road, the place in which the word was sown; and if they hear, then immediately Satan cometh, and taketh away the word which was sown in them.
4:16 And these, again thus, are they who were sown upon the rocky places, who, if they should hear the word, receive it with joy;
4:17 and there is not root in them, but they are (only) for a time; then, if there should be tribulation or persecution because of the word, immediately they are offended.
4:18 And others are they who were sown upon the thorns; these are they who heard the word,
4:19 and the care of this age, and the deceit of [the] riches, and the lusts of the rest of (things) also, in which they walk (lit. walking in them), choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.
4:20 And they also who were sown upon the good earth, (are) they who, if they should hear the word, receive it to them, and they yield fruit, one thirty, one sixty, one a hundred.'
4:21 And he was saying to them: Do they light a lamp, that they may put it under the measurer, or under the bed, (and) not that they may put it upon the lampstand?
4:22 For there is not that which is hidden (so that) it should not appear; nor is it done, being hidden, except that it may come to be (lit. being) manifested.
4:23 He who hath an ear to hear, let him hear.'
4:24 And be was saying to them again: 'Take heed, what ye hear: in the measure which ye measure, it will be measured to you: and it will be added to you.
4:25 For to him who hath shall be given: and from him who hath not, even that which he hath they take away.'
4:26 And he was saying: 'Thus is the kingdom of God, as a man casting his seed upon the earth;
4:27 and he sleepeth, and he riseth in the night and the day, and the seed flourisheth and increaseth, he knoweth not how.
4:28 The earth of itself yieldeth fruit; first a blade, then an ear, then that which is in the ear fills
4:29 But if the fruit should reach (Matthewurity), immediately he sendeth the sickle, because the harvest came.'
4:30 And he was saying: 'To what are we to liken the kingdom of God? or in what parable are we to set it (forth)?
4:31 It was as a grain of mustard seed, which if it should be sown on the earth, being less than all the seeds which are upon the earth,
4:32 yet (lit. and) if it is sown, it cometh up, and becometh greater than all the herbs, and maketh great branches; so that the birds of (the) heaven can lodge under its shadow.'
4:33 And he was speaking to them the word in parables thus, according as they were able to hear:
4:34 and without parable he was not speaking to them: but apart he was explaining all to his disciples.
4:35 And he said to them on that day, evening having come: Let us pass across.'
4:36 And having left the multitude, they took him away with them, as he is in the ship. And there were other ships with him.
4:37 And there was a great wind, and the waves were casting themselves into the ship, so that the ship was now filling.
4:38 And he was sleeping behind upon the pillow: and they woke him, and said to him: Teacher, carest thou not that we shall (lit. will) perish?'
4:39 And having risen, he rebuked the wind, and said to (the) sea: 'Hold thy peace and be silenced.' And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
4:40 And he said to them: Wherefore fear ye? is there not yet faith in you?'
4:41 And they feared with a great fear, and were saying to one another: Who then is this, because the winds and (the) sea obey him? '
5:1 And he came across (the) sea to (the) country of the Gergesenes.
5:2 And having come out of the ship, immediately there came to meet him out of the sepulchres a man with (lit. being in) an unclean spirit,
5:3 whose dwelling was (imperf.) in the sepulchres: and neither even in the chains is it possible for any one to bind him;
5:4 because that he had been bound many times with fetters and chains, and he had burst the chains from him, and the fetters had been broken-inpieces: and it was not possible that any one should tame him.
5:5 And always in the night and the day, he (is) being in the sepulchres, and he was (imperf.) in the mountains crying out, and cutting himself with stones.
5:6 And having seen Jesus from afar off, he ran, and worshipped him,
5:7 and having cried out with a great voice, [and] he said: 'What (hast) thou with me, thou Jesus (the) Son of God, who is high? I adjure thee by God, torture me not.'
5:8 For he was saying: Come out, unclean spirit, from (lit. in) the man.'
5:9 And he was asking him: What is thy name?'And he said to him: 'Legion is my name, because we are many.'
5:10 And he was beseeching him much, that he should not send him outside of the country.
5:11 Now there was a great herd of swine there feeding by the mountain.
5:12 And they were beseeching him, saying: Send us to the swine that we may enter them.'
5:13 And he commanded them (to do so). And the unclean spirits having come out, went into the swine: and the herd fell down by the precipice into (the) sea, being two thousand; and they were choked in the sea.
5:14 And they who were feeding them fled, and told it in the city, and in (the) field. And they came to see what it is, which was done.
5:15 And they came to Jesus, they saw him, with whom were (imperf.) the demons, sitting, clothed, and having (lit. being) his mind (lit. heart) in him: and they feared.
5:16 And they who saw (it) spake before them, how it was done to him, with whom were (imperf.) the demons, and concerning the swine.
5:17 And they began to beseech him, that he should go from their borders.
5:18 And he entered into the ship. He who had been (possessed) with demons was beseeching him that he might stay with him.
5:19 And he permitted him not, but said to him: 'Go into thy house to them who are thine, and shew to them the things, which the Lord did for thee, having pitied thee.'
5:20 And he departed, and began to publish in (the) Decapolis that which Jesus did for him: and they all were wondering.
5:21 And Jesus having come again across in the ship, a great multitude assembled to him: and he was (iinperf.) by (the) sea.
5:22 And there came to him one of the rulers-of-the-synagogue, whose name is Jairus; and having seen him, he threw himself before his feet,
5:23 and was beseeching him much, saying My daughter approached to (the) death: (I pray thee) that thou come and lay thy hand upon her, that she may be saved, and may live.'
5:24 And he went with him; and a great multitude walked after him, and they were thronging him.
5:25 And lo, a woman--she had been twelve years having an issue of blood,
5:26 and she suffered much from many physicians, and spent all which she had, and gained not anything, but rather became worse,
5:27 and having heard concerning Jesus, she came in the multitude behind, she touched his garment.
5:28 For she was saying: If I should but touch his garments, I shall (lit. will) be saved.'
5:29 And immediately the fountain of her blood was dried; and she knew in her body that she was cured from the plague.
5:30 And immediately Jesus knew in himself the power which came out of him; having turned himself in the multitude, he was saying: Who touched my garments?'
5:31 And his disciples were saying to him: Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and thou sayest: "Who touched me?"'
5:32 And he was looking to see her who did this (thing).
5:33 But the woman having feared, [and] trembled, knowing what was done to her, came and threw herself down before him, and told all the truth to him.
5:34 And he said to her: My daughter, thy faith saved thee; go in peace, and be (it) for a curing from thy plague.'
5:35 (As he is) yet speaking, they came to the ruler-of-the-synagogue, saying: Thy daughter died: wherefore (art thou) troubling the Teacher?'
5:36 But Jesus having heard the word which they say, said to the ruler-of-the-synagogue: 'Fear not, only believe.'
5:37 And he permitted not any one with him, walking after him, except Peter, and James, and John (the) brother of James.
5:38 And they came to (the) house of the ruler-of-the-synagogue; and they saw them making-atumult, and weeping and lamenting much.
5:39 And having entered, he said to them: 'Wherefore make-ye-a-tumult, and weep? the child died not, but she slept.'
5:40 And they were mocking him. But he, having put (lit. thrown) all out, took away with him (the) father of the child and her mother and them who were with him, and went into the place in which the child was (imperf.).
5:41 And having laid hold on (the) hand of the child, he said to her: Talitha which is this: Child, I said to thee, rise.'
5:42 And immediately the child rose, and walked; for she was (imperf.) [in] twelve years (old). And they were wondering immediately with great wonder.
5:43 And he ordered them much that no one should know this: and he said that they should give (lit. give eat) to her to eat.
6:1 And having come from there, he came into his city; and his disciples walked after him.
6:2 And the (lit. a) sabbath having come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and many heard; they were wondering, saying: 'Whence (lit. where) found this (man) these (things)? and what is this wisdom which was given to this (man); and these mighty-works also of this kind which are done by his bands?
6:3 Is not this the carpenter, (the) son of Mary, and (the) brother of James, and Josetos, and Judas, and Simon? and his sisters were (imperf.) here with us.' And they were (imperf.) offended in him.
6:4 And Jesus was saying to them: 'There is not a prophet despised except in his city, and his kindred, and his house.'
6:5 And he could not there do even one mighty work, except having laid hand on many sick folk he healed them.
6:6 And he wondered because of their unbelief. And he passed through the villages which were around, teaching.
6:7 And he called the twelve, and began to send them, two-and-two; and he gave authority to them over the unclean spirits;
6:8 and he ordered them not to take away anything with them on (the) road, except a staff only; neither bread, nor scrip, nor brass in your girdles;
6:9 but your feet being shod with sandals: and clothe not yourselves with two coats.
6:10 And he was saying to them: The place in which ye will enter a house, abide there until ye come from there.
6:11 And every place which will not receive you to it, nor hear you, (as ye are) coming from there, shake off (the) dust which is underneath your feet for a witness to them.'
6:12 And having come out they preached that they should repent.
6:13 And they cast out many demons. They were anointing with oil many sick folk, and were healing them.
6:14 And (the) king Herod heard, for his name manifested itself; and he was saying, that John the Baptist rose from the dead, therefore the powers work in him.
6:15 But others were saying, that (it) is Elias. And others were saying, that (it is) a prophet, as one of the prophets of-old-time.
6:16 But Herod having heard, was saying: '(It is) John, whom I beheaded; he rose (again).'
6:17 For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him in the prison because of Herodias, (the) wife of Philip his brother, because he was taking her.
6:18 For John was saying to Herod: 'It is not lawful for thee to take (the) wife of thy brother.'
6:19 And Herodias was (imperf.) indignant against him, and was wishing to kill him; and she was not able;
6:20 for Herod feared John, knowing him that he is a righteous man, and is holy, and he was guarding him. And he was hearing much from him, and he was (import') doubtful; and gladly he was hearing him.
6:21 And a convenient day having come, when Herod on his birthday made a supper to his great (men), and the chiliarchs, and the first (men) of Galilee.
6:22 And (the) daughter of Herodias having come in, and having danced, was pleasing to Herod and them who sat at meat with him; and (the) king said to the damsel: Ask me for that which thou wishest, and I give it to thee.'
6:23 And he sware to her: That for which thou wilt ask, I will give to thee, unto (the) half of my kingdom.'
6:24 And having come out, she said to her mother: For what shall (lit. will) I ask?' And she said: (The) head of John the Baptist.'
6:25 And having come in with haste to (the) king, she asked, saying: wish that now thou give to me (the) head of John the Baptist on a dish.'
6:26 And (the) heart of (the) king having been pained, because of the oaths, and them who sat at meat with him, he wished not to reject her.
6:27 And immediately (the) king sent a soldier-of-his-guard. He commanded that he should bring his head on the dish.
6:28 And he gave it to the damsel; and the damsel gave it to her mother.
6:29 And his disciples having heard, came: they took away the body, and laid it within a sepulchre.
6:30 And the apostles assembled to Jesus; and they shewed him everything which they did, and that which they taught.
6:31 And he said to them: 'Come ye apart to a desert place, and rest yourselves for a little.' For they who came and they who went were (imperf.) many, and they were not finding leisure even to eat.
6:32 And they went in the ship to a desert place apart.
6:33 And they saw them departing, and many knew them, and they ran there on foot from every city, and came before them.
6:34 And having come out he saw a great multitude, and he had compassion upon them, because they were (imperf.) as sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them much.
6:35 And now a late (lit. great) hour having come: his disciples having come to him were saying: The place is a desert, and now the hour (has) passed:
6:36 send them away that they may go to the fields which are around, and the villages, and buy for them that which they will eat.'
6:37 But he answered, he said to them: Give ye to them: let them eat.' And they said to him: Shall (]it. will) we go and buy two hundred staters-worth of bread, and give to them to eat?'
6:38 And he said to them: How many loaves have ye? Go, see.' And having known they said: Five loaves and two fishes.'
6:39 And he commanded them that they should sit clown to meat by companies upon the green grass.
6:40 And they all sat down to meat in ranks (lit. of place place), by hundreds and by fifties.
6:41 And having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked to (the) heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave to the disciples, that they might set before them; and the two fishes also he brake among them all.
6:42 And they all ate, and were satisfied.
6:43 And they took up twelve baskets of fragments full, and from the fishes also.
6:44 And they who were eating the loaves were (imperf.) five thousand men.
6:45 And immediately he constrained his disciples to enter into the ship, and go (lit. draw) before him across to Bethsaida, until he sent away the multitude.
6:46 And having taken leave of them, he went to the mountain to pray.
6:47 And evening having come, the ship was (imperf.) in (the) midst of (the) sea, and he alone was (imperf.) on the shore.
6:48 And he saw (or having seen) them distressed in (the) rowing (lit, drawing), for the wind was (imperf.) contrary to them. And in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking upon (the) sea; and he was wishing to pass by them:
6:49 but they, having seen him walking upon (the) sea, were thinking that it was (lit. is) an apparition, and they cried out:
6:50 for they had all seen him, and were troubled. But he immediately spake to them, and said to them: Be of good cheer: it is I; fear not.'
6:51 And he entered into the ship to them: and the wind ceased: and they were (imperf.) amazed greatly in themselves;
6:52 for they understood not about the loaves, but their heart was (imperf.) hardened.
6:53 And having crossed over, they came to Gennesareth, and moored (the ship).
6:54 And having come up from the ship, (the people) knew him immediately.
6:55 They ran, in all that region, and began to carry them who were afflicted, on beds, to where they hear that he is.
6:56 And the place into which he goeth, into the villages, or the cities, or the fields, (there) they were laying them who were sick in the market places, and they were beseeching him that they might but touch the hem of his garments; and all who touch him are cured.
7:1 And there assembled to him the Pharisees, and some of the scribes, having come from Jerusalem;
7:2 and having seen some of his disciples that they eat bread (lit. the loaves), their hands being polluted, which is this: unwashen
7:3 For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, eat not, unless they washed (their hands) many times; holding the tradition of the elders:
7:4 and if they should not bathe themselves, (when they come) from the market place, they eat not. And there were many other (things) which they received, (and) which they held; washings (lit. bathings) of cups, and pots, and brasen vessels.
7:5 And the Pharisees and the scribes asked him: Wherefore walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but with hands polluted they eat [the] bread?'
7:6 And he said to them: Well prophesied concerning you Isaiah, (ye) of the hypocrites, as it is written: "This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far away from me;
7:7 worshipping me in vain, teaching (as) teachings precepts of man."
7:8 Having left the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of [the] men.'
7:9 And he was saying to them: Well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your tradition.
7:10 For Moses said: "Honour thy father and thy mother; and he who will speak evil at his father and his mother, let him die the (lit. a) death."
7:11 But ye say, that if a man should say to his father and his mother, "Corban,--which is a gift,--if thou shouldest gain it from me;"
7:12 ye permit not him to do anything for his father or his mother;
7:13 making void the word of God by (lit. in) your tradition, which ye delivered: and many (things) of this kind like these ye do.'
7:14 And having called again the multitude, he said to them: Hear me and understand:
7:15 there is not anything outside of the man [for] which, going into the mouth, can (lit. it is possible to) defile him: but the things which come from the mouth of the man (defile him).'
7:16 Omitted
7:17 And when they came into the house from the multitude, his disciples were asking him of the parable.
7:18 And he said to them: Are ye thus without understanding? Understood ye not, that all things which are outside, going into the mouth of the man--it is not possible for them to defile him;
7:19 because they go not into his heart, but his belly, and go to the draught?' (This he said,) cleansing all meats.
7:20 And he was saying: That which cometh from the mouth of the man, that (lit. he) defileth the man.
7:21 For from within, out of the heart of the men, come out the evil reasonings, the fornications, the thefts, the murders, the adulteries,
7:22 the violences, the wickednesses, the deceits, the defilements, the evil eyes, the blasphemies, pride, foolishness:
7:23 all these evil things (are) coming from within, and they defile the man.'
7:24 And having risen from there, he went to the parts of Tyre and Sidon; and having gone into a house, he was not wishing that any should know (it): and he could not be hid (lit. be forgotten).
7:25 And immediately a woman heard concerning him, (one,) with whose daughter was an unclean spirit. Having come in, she threw herself down at his feet.
7:26 Now the woman was Greek of Syria, her race is from Phoenice. And she was beseeching him that he would cast a demon out of her daughter.
7:27 And he was saying to her: 'Permit it first, that the sons should be satisfied: for it is not good to take away (the) bread of the sons to give it to the dogs.'
7:28 But she answered, she said to him: Yea, my Lord: even the dogs eat under the table of the crumbs of the children.'
7:29 And he said to her: Because of this word go (away); the demon went from thy daughter.'
7:30 And having gone to her house, she found the child upon the bed, and the demon went from her.
7:31 And having come again from the borders of Tyre, he was passing through Sidon to (the) sea of Galilee, between the borders of Decapolis.
7:32 And they brought to him a deaf-dumb (man); and besought him that he would lay hand upon him.
7:33 And he took him away apart from the multitude; he put (lit. threw) his fingers into his ears, and having spit, he touched his tongue;
7:34 and having looked up to (the) heaven, he sighed, and said to him: Epphatha,' which is this: 'Open.'
7:35 And his ears opened, and the bond of his tongue unloosed, and he was speaking plain (lit. straight).
7:36 And he ordered them that they should not tell it to any one: but as (he commanded), rather they were publishing (it) the more:
7:37 they were wondering, saying: He did all well, having made the deaf hear, and the speechless speak.'
8:1 In those days again a great multitude being with him, and there is not that which they will eat, he called the disciples, he said to them:
8:2 I have compassion upon this multitude, because lo, three days they stay with me, and there is not that which they will eat:
8:3 and if I should send them away to their house without eating, they will faint on the road; and some also of them were (imperf.) from far.
8:4 And the disciples answered him: For whom (and) whence here is it possible to satisfy these with bread on (the) desert?'
8:5 And he was asking them: How many loaves have ye?' And they said: Seven.'
8:6 And he ordered the multitude that they should sit down to meat upon the ground: and having taken the seven loaves, he gave thanks, he brake them, and gave to his disciples that they should set (them) before them: and they set (them) before the multitude.
8:7 And they had also a few fishes: and he blessed them, he told them to set these also before them.
8:8 And they ate, and were satisfied: and they took up the abundance (plur.) of the fragments seven baskets.
8:9 They were (imperf.) four thousand: and he sent them away.
8:10 And immediately he entered into the ship, he came to the parts of Dalmanutha.
8:11 And the Pharisees came forth, they began to question with him, seeking for a sign from him from (the) heaven, tempting him.
8:12 And having sighed in his spirit, he said: 'Why doth this generation seek for a sign? Verily I say to you: Will a sign be given to this generation?'
8:13 And having sent them away, he entered into (a ship), he went across.
8:14 And they forgot to take bread; and they had not any on the ship except one (lit. a) loaf only.
8:15 And he was ordering them, saying: Take heed and beware of (the) leaven of the Pharisees, and (the) leaven of Herod.'
8:16 And they were reasoning with one another, saying that they have not bread.
8:17 And having known, he said to them: 'Why reason ye, because ye have not bread? Know ye not yet, and do ye not understand? Is your heart hardened?
8:18 And ye have eyes, see ye not? and ye have ears, hear ye not? and remember ye not
8:19 the five loaves which I brake for the five thousand, (and) that ye took up how many baskets full?' They said to him: Twelve.'
8:20 And the seven for the four thousand, (and) that ye took up how many baskets full?' They said to him: Seven.'
8:21 And he was saying to them: 'How (is it that) ye understand not?'
8:22 And they came to Bethsaida. And they brought to him a blind man, and they were beseeching him that he should touch him.
8:23 And he took hold of (the) hand of the blind man, and brought him outside of the village; and having spit in his eyes, he laid his hand upon him; he was asking: 'What seest thou?'
8:24 And having seen, he was saying: I see the men as trees, walking.'
8:25 Then again he laid his hands upon his eyes; and he saw, and he was cured, he saw everything clearly.
8:26 And he sent him to his house, saying: Go not into the village.'
8:27 And Jesus came forth, and his disciples, to the villages of Caesarea Philippi: and in the road he was asking his disciples, saying to them: Whom said [the] men that I (am)'?'
8:28 They told him, saying: John the Baptist; and others: "Elias;" others: "One of the prophets."'
8:29 And he was asking them: But whom say ye that I (am)?' Peter answered and said: 'Thou art Christ.'
8:30 And he charged them that they should not say to any one concerning him.
8:31 And he began to teach them, that (the) Son of (the) man must suffer much, and be rejected by the elders, and the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise.
8:32 And he was speaking the word openly. And Peter laid hold on him, he began to rebuke him.
8:33 But he having turned himself, and having seen his disciples, rebuked Peter, and said: Go behind me, Satan: because thou mindest not the things of God, but the things of [the] men.'
8:34 And having called the multitude and his disciples, he said to them: He who wisheth to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
8:35 For he who will wish to save his life (lit. soul, thus again) shall lose it; and he who will lose his life because of me and because of the gospel, shall save it.
8:36 For what will the man gain, if he should gain the whole world, and forfeit his life?
8:37 For (what is) that which the man will give in exchange for his life?
8:38 For he who will be ashamed to confess me and my words in this generation adulterous and sinful, (the) Son of (the) man also will be ashamed of him, when he should come in (the) glory of his Father and his holy angels.'
9:1 And he was saying to them: Verily I say to you, that there are some among them who stand here, (who) will not taste of (the) death, until they see the kingdom of God come (lit. it came, or coming) with power.'
9:2 And after six days Jesus took Peter, and James, and John, and took them away upon a high mountain apart alone. He changed himself before them.
9:3 And his garments became glistering as snow, and very white; as (lit. they which) it is not possible that a fuller who is upon the earth should make thus white.
9:4 And Elias and Moses manifested themselves to them: and they were speaking to Jesus.
9:5 And then Peter, having answered, said to Jesus: Rabbi, it is good for us that we be here, and make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.'
9:6 For he was not knowing what he will answer him; for they became full of fear.
9:7 And there was a cloud shadowing them: and there was a voice out of the cloud: This is my Son, my beloved: hearken to him.'
9:8 And having looked suddenly, they saw not any one, except Jesus alone with them.
9:9 And (as they are) coming down from the mountain, he ordered them that they should not speak before any one that which they saw, except (the) Son of (the) man rise from the dead.
9:10 And they held the word among them, questioning with one another: What is the rising from the dead?'
9:11 And they asked him, saying Wherefore say the scribes that it is necessary that Elias come first?'
9:12 And he said to them: Elias indeed cometh first, and will restore everything: and how (it is) written about (the) Son of (the) man, that he should suffer much, and should be despised.
9:13 But I say to you, that Elias came, and they did to him that which they wish, according as it is written about him.'
9:14 And having come to the disciples, he saw a great multitude around them, and scribes questioning with them.
9:15 And immediately all the multitude, having seen him, feared, and having run, saluted him.
9:16 And he asked them:: For what sought ye from them?'
9:17 And one from the multitude answered him: Teacher, I brought my son to thee, a speechless spirit being with him;
9:18 and where it will catch him, it dasheth (lit. bringeth) him down: and his mouth foameth, (he is) grinding his teeth, and pineth away: and I told thy disciples that they might cast it out; and they could not.'
9:19 And he having answered, said to them: 'O [the] faithless generation, how long shall (lit. will) I be with you? how long shall (lit. will) I bear with you? bring him to me.'
9:20 And the spirit having seen him, immediately convulsed him; and having fallen upon (the) earth, he was trembling, his mouth foaming.
9:21 And A d he asked his father: Lo, how much time (is it) since this happened to him?' And he said: From his childhood.'
9:22 And many times it casteth him into the fire and the water, that it may destroy him: but as to that which is possible for thee help us, having compassion upon us.'
9:23 And Jesus said to him: 'What, then, is (this, namely) as to that which is possible for thee? It is possible as to everything for him who believeth.'
9:24 Immediately cried out (the) father of the child, saying: I believe; help my unbelief.'
9:25 Jesus having seen that the multitude ran (up), rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to him: 'Speechless and deaf spirit, I command thee, come out of him, and no more enter him.'
9:26 And having cried out, and having convulsed him much, he came out; and he was as one dead; so that many said: He died.'
9:27 But Jesus took hold of his hand, raised him, and he rose.
9:28 And he went into his house. His disciples asked him apart: Wherefore could not we cast him out?'
9:29 And he said to them: It is not possible that this kind should come out with anything, except with prayer and fasting.'
9:30 And having come from there, they were passing through Galilee; and he wished not that any one should know.
9:31 For he was teaching his disciples, and was saying to them: (The) Son of (the) man will be given into (the) hands of [the] men, and they will kill him; after three days he will rise.'
9:32 But they were (imperf) ignorant of the word, and were fearing to ask him.
9:33 And he came into Kapharnaum: and having come into the house, he was asking them: What were ye reasoning [them] on (the) road? '
9:34 But they held their peace: for they were speaking to one another on (the) road, who of them is the great.
9:35 And having sat down, he called the twelve; and said to them: 'He who wisheth to be first, shall be last of every one, and minister of every one.'
9:36 And having taken a child, he made him stand in their midst; and having taken hold of him, he said to them:
9:37 He who will receive one of these children of this kind in my name, receiveth me: and he who receiveth me, receiveth not me, but he received him who sent me.'
9:38 John said to him: Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in thy name: and we forbade him, because he followeth us not.'
9:39 But Jesus said to him: Forbid him not: for there is not any one, who will do a mighty work in my name, and could quickly speak evil against me.
9:40 For he who is not against us, was for us.
9:41 For he who will give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ; verily I say to you, that his reward shall not perish.
9:42 And he who will offend one of these little ones who believe, it is good for him, rather to hang a millstone to him, and to be cast into (the) sea.
9:43 And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is good for thee that thou come into the life being maimed, than with two hands that thou go to the Geenna, to the unquenchable fire.
9:44 Omitted
9:45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it (off), cast it away: it is good for thee that thou come into the life being lame, than having two feet that thou be cast to the Geenna.
9:46 Omitted
9:47 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is good for thee that thou come into the kingdom of God with only thy (one) eye, than having two eyes that thou be cast to the Geenna,
9:48 where their worm dieth not., and their fire is not quenched.
9:49 Every one they salt with the fire.
9:50 [The] salt is good: but if the salt become saltless, with (lit. in) what do they salt it? Let there be salt in you, and be at peace with (lit. in) one another.'
10:1 And having risen from there, he came to the borders of Judea and beyond the Jordan: and multitudes came again to him, and as it was (lit. is) his custom, he was teaching them.
10:2 And Pharisees came to him; they were asking him, whether it is lawful for (a) man to put away his wife, tempting him.
10:3 And he answered, he said to them: What did Moses order for (lit. on) you?'
10:4 And they said to him: Moses commanded to write a bill (lit. book of writing) of divorcement, and to put away.'
10:5 But Jesus said to them: Because of your hardness of heart he wrote this commandment for you.
10:6 But from (the) beginning of the creation, a male and female he created them.
10:7 Therefore the man shall leave his father and his mother, and shall join himself to his wife;
10:8 and they (the) two shall become one flesh: so that they are not two, but it is one flesh.
10:9 That then which God joined, let not (the) man separate.'
10:10 And in the house again the disciples asked him concerning this.
10:11 And he said to them: He who will put away his wife, and take another, committeth adultery against her:
10:12 and if she herself put away her husband, and take another, she committeth adultery.'
10:13 And they brought to him children, that he might touch them: and the disciples rebuked them.
10:14 But Jesus having seen (it), was grieved, and said to them: Permit the children to come to me; forbid them not to come to me: for of such is the kingdom of God.
10:15 Verily I say to you, that he who will not receive the kingdom of God to him as a child, shall not come into it.'
10:16 And having embraced them, he blessed them, he laid hand upon them.
10:17 And (as he is) coming forth to a road, one ran (up), he threw himself upon his knees, he was asking him: 'Good Teacher, what shall (lit. will) I do that I may inherit eternal life?'
10:18 And Jesus said to him: Wherefore sayest thou of me: "The good?" there is not any one good except God alone.
10:19 Thou knowest the commandments; kill not; commit not adultery; steal not; bear not false witness; defraud no; honour thy father and thy mother.'
10:20 And he said to him: Teacher, all these I kept from my childhood.'
10:21 And Jesus having looked upon him, loved him, and said to him: Another thing thou lackest: go, sell that which thou hast, give it (lit. them) to the poor, and thou shalt get for thee a treasure in (the) heaven: and come, follow me.'
10:22 But he having been saddened at the word, went (away), being grieved: for he was having many possessions.
10:23 And Jesus having looked, said to his disciples: How difficult it is for them who have the riches to come into the kingdom of God!'
10:24 And the disciples were fearing at the word. But Jesus again having answered them, said: My sons, how difficult it is for them who trust to riches to come into the kingdom of God!
10:25 It is easier for a camel to pass through (the) eye of a needle, than that a rich man come into the kingdom of God.'
10:26 And they were wondering the more, saying to him: Who will be able to be saved?'
10:27 Jesus having looked upon them, said: 'With [the] men impossible, but not for God: for all is possible for God.'
10:28 Peter began to say to him: Lo, we left all, and followed thee.'
10:29 Jesus said: Verily I say, that there is not any one who left house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or son, or land, because of me, and because of the gospel,
10:30 unless he should receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and fathers, and sons, and lands, with (lit. in) the persecutions; and in the age which cometh, eternal life.
10:31 But many first shall be last; and last about to be first.'
10:32 And they were (imperf.) on (the) road, coming up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was walking before them: and they were fearing; and they, who were following, were fearing. And again he brought the twelve (close) to him, he began to tell them the things which will happen to him:
10:33 Lo, we shall (lit. will) go up to Jerusalem; and (the) Son of (the) man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes; and they will condemn him to death, and they will deliver him to the Gentiles:
10:34 and they will mock him, and they will spit upon him, and they will scourge him, and they will kill him; and after three days he will rise.'
10:35 And there came to him James and John, (the) two sons of Zebedee, saying to him: 'Teacher, we wish that that, which we shall (lit. will) ask, thou mayest do for us.'
10:36 And he said to them: What wish ye that I should do for you? '
10:37 They said to him: 'Give to us that one should sit on thy right hand, and one of us on thy left hand in thy glory.'
10:38 But Jesus said to them: Ye know not what ye will ask. Is it possible for you to drink the cup which I drink? or (to be baptised with) the baptism, with which I baptise myself?
10:39 And they said: 'It is possible for us.' And Jesus said to them: The cup which I drink, ye shall drink it; and the baptism with which I baptise myself, ye shall baptise yourselves with it:
10:40 but the sitting on my right hand or left hand is not mine to give: but it belongs to them for whom he prepared it.'
10:41 And the ten other having heard, began to murmur because of James and John.
10:42 And Jesus having called them, said to them: Ye know that they, who think that they are rulers of the Gentiles, are lords of them; and their great (ones) are in authority over them.
10:43 But thus it is not among you: but he who will wish to be great among you shall be minister (lit. deacon) to you:
10:44 and he who will wish to be first among you shall be servant of every one.
10:45 For (the) Son of (the) man came not to be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life (lit. soul) a ransom in exchange for many.'
10:46 And they came to Jericho: and (as he is) coming out of Jericho, and his disciples and a great multitude, Bartimeos, (the) son of Timeos, being a blind beggar, was sitting by the road.
10:47 And having heard that it is Jesus the Nazarene, he began to say, crying out, saying: Jesus, (the) son of David, pity me.'
10:48 And many were rebuking him, that he should hold his peace. But he was crying out the more rather: (The) son of David pity me.'
10:49 And Jesus having stood, said: Call him.' And they called to the blind man, saying to him: Be of good cheer: rise, come, he calleth thee.'
10:50 And he having cast away his garment, and having sprung up, came to Jesus.
10:51 And Jesus answered him, he said: What wishest thou that I should do to thee?' The blind man said to him: Rabbuni, that I may see.'
10:52 And Jesus said to him: Go, thy faith saved thee.' And immediately he saw, and was walking after him in the road.
11:1 And having approached Jerusalem, he came to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mountain of the Olives; he sent two of his disciples,
11:2 and said to them: Go to this village which is in front of you: and immediately, going to enter it, ye shall find a colt tied, upon which no man yet mounted; unloose him, and bring him.
11:3 And if any one say to you: "What is this which ye do?" say that the Lord path need of him; and immediately he will send him hither.'
11:4 And they went, and found a colt tied at a door outside in (lit. of) the street; and they unloosed him.
11:5 And some of them who stood there were saying to them: What do ye, unloosing the colt?'
11:6 And they said to them, according as Jesus said to them: and they permitted them.
11:7 And they brought the colt to Jesus, and placed on him their garments; and he sat upon them.
11:8 And many spread their garments on the road; and others cut branches of trees in the fields, and were spreading them on the road.
11:9 And they who were walking before, and they who were walking behind, were crying out: Osanna; blessed is he who cometh in (the) name of the Lord.
11:10 Blessed is the kingdom, which cometh, of our father David: Osanna in the highest.'
11:11 And he Caine into Jerusalem, into the temple; and having gazed at all, evening now of time (lit. an an hour) having come, he came to Bethany with the twelve.
11:12 And on the (lit. his) morrow, they having come from Bethany, he hungered.
11:13 Having seen a fig-tree afar off having (lit. being) leaves on it, he came (to see) whether he will find anything on it: and having come to it, he found not anything except leaves; for it was (imperf.) not (the) time of figs.
11:14 And having answered, he said to it: No one shall find fruit on thee for ever.' And his disciples were hearing.
11:15 And they came to Jerusalem: and having come into the temple, he began to cast out all them who sold and them who bought in the temple, and the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of them who sold doves, he overturned;
11:16 and he was not permitting any one to (lit. that he) bring a vessel through the temple.
11:17 And he was teaching, and was saying to them: 'It is written, that my house shall be called "a house of prayer for all the nations:" but ye made it a cave of robbers.'
11:18 And the chief priests and the scribes having heard, [and] were seeking in what manner they are to destroy him: for they were fearing him, for all the multitude were wondering at his teaching.
11:19 And if evening came, he was departing outside of the city.
11:20 And passing by in the morning, they saw the fig-tree; it (had) withered away to (lit. on) its root.
11:21 And Peter having remembered said to him: 'Rabbi, lo, the fig-tree, which thou cursedst, withered away.'
11:22 And Jesus having answered said to them: 'Have faith in God.
11:23 For verily I say to you, that he who will say to this mountain: "Lift thyself up and cast thyself into (the) sea;" and not doubt in his heart, but believe that what he saith will be done; it shall be done to him.
11:24 Therefore I say to you, that everything which ye will ask in prayer, believe that ye received, and they shall be done to you.
11:25 And if ye should stand for praying, forgive that which ye have against any (lit. him); that your Father also who is in the heavens may forgive you your trespasses.'
11:26 Omitted
11:27 And they came again to Jerusalem: and (as he is) walking in the temple there came to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders;
11:28 and they were saying to him: 'With what authority didst thou these things? or who gave to thee this authority, that thou doest these things?'
11:29 And Jesus said to them: I shall (lit, will) ask you one word; answer me; and I also shall (lit. will) say to you with what authority I did these things.
11:30 The baptism of John, was it from (the) heaven, or from [the] men? answer me.'
11:31 And they were reasoning with one another, saying: If we should say, that it is from (the) heaven, he will say, "Wherefore believed ye him not?"
11:32 But should we say, that (it is) from [the] men, we fear the multitude; for John was (imperf.) to all of them really (lit. that he was really a prophet.'
11:33 And having answered Jesus they said: We know not.' And Jesus also said to them: Neither shall (lit. will) I also say to you with what authority I did (these things).'
12:1 And he began to speak to them in parables: There was a man; he planted a vineyard, and built a wall (lit. hedge) for it, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower in it, and delivered it to husbandmen, and went to (the) foreign (land).
12:2 And he sent to the husbandmen in (the) time a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of (the) fruit of the vineyard.
12:3 And having taken him they beat him, and sent him (away) empty.
12:4 And he sent again to them another servant; and this (lit. the) other one they wounded and reviled.
12:5 And he sent another; and this (lit. the) other they killed. And he sent many others: some they stoned, and others they killed.
12:6 Having (lit. who was his) yet a beloved son, he sent him at (the) end to them, saying: "They will reverence my son."
12:7 But those husband men were saying to one another: "This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let the inheritance be ours."
12:8 And having taken him, they killed him, and cast him outside of the vineyard.
12:9 What will the Lord of the vineyard do? He will come and will destroy the husbandmen, and give the vineyard to others.
12:10 Did ye not read even this scripture, that the stone which the builders rejected, this was made for a completion of (the) corner:
12:11 this having been done by the Lord, and it is wonderful in our eyes?'
12:12 And they were seeking to lay hold on him; and they feared the multitude; for they knew that he spake (lit. said) this parable concerning them: and having left him they went (away).
12:13 And they sent to him some of the Pharisees and the Herodians, that they might ensnare him by word.
12:14 And having come, they said to him: Teacher, we know that thou (art) true, and carest not for any one: for thou regardest not (the) person of men, but teachest the road of God in truth. Is it lawful to give tax to (the) king, or not? should (conj.) we give, or should we not give
12:15 But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them: Wherefore tempt ye me? Bring me a stater, that I may see it.'
12:16 And they brought (it). And he said to them: Whose is this image and this superscription?' And they said to him: '(The) king's are they.'
12:17 And he said to them: ('The) king's (things) give to (the) king, and God's (things) give to God.' And they were wondering at him.
12:18 And there came to him Sadducees, who say that there is not (to) be resurrection; and they were asking him, saying:
12:19 Teacher, Moses wrote to us, that if (the) brother of any one die, and leave behind a wife, and leave not son, that his brother should take his (lit. the) wife, and raise up seed to his brother.
12:20 Now there were seven brothers with us: and the first took (a) wife; he died (lit. was dying), he left not seed;
12:21 and the second took her, and died, he left not seed; and the third thus again:
12:22 and the seventh; they left not seed. And at (the) end of them all died the woman also.
12:23 In the resurrection, of which of them is she to be wife? for the seven took her to wife.'
12:24 Jesus said to them: Do ye not therefore err? Ye know not the scripture, nor the power of God.
12:25 For when they should rise from (lit. in, or among) the dead, they neither take, nor are taken (to wife); but are as the angels in the heavens.
12:26 But concerning the dead, that they will rise; did ye not read in (the) book of Moses, how He said to him in (lit. upon) the bush, saying: "I am God of Abraam, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob?"
12:27 God is not (the God) of the dead, but of the living: ye err greatly.'
12:28 And there came to him one of the scribes, having heard them questioning (lit. seeking), knowing that he answered them well, asked him: What is the commandment which is first of them all?'
12:29 Jesus answered: The first is this: Hear, Israel; the Lord thy God is one Lord:
12:30 and thou shalt love the Lord thy God from all thy heart, and from all thy soul, and from all thy thoughts, and from all thy power.
12:31 The second is this: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is not another commandment greater than these.'
12:32 The scribe said to him: Well, Teacher, in truth thou saidst, that God is one; and there is no other except him;
12:33 and the loving him with all thy heart, and with all thy power, and with all the understanding; and the loving thy neighbour as thyself,--they are greater than all the whole-burntofferings and the sacrifices.'
12:34 And Jesus having seen him, that he answered (as) having sense (lit. heart), said to him: Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.' And no one could dare to ask him (further).
12:35 And Jesus having answered was saying, (as he is) teaching in the temple. How say the scribes, that Christ is (the) son of David?
12:36 David himself said in the Holy Spirit: The Lord said to my Lord: "Sit thou on my right hand, until I put thine enemies below thy feet."'
12:37 David himself saying of him, Lord;' then (lit. and) whence is (he) his son? And the great multitude was hearing him gladly.
12:38 And in his teaching he was saying: 'Beware of the scribes, and them who wish to walk in long robes, and (for) salutations in the market-places,
12:39 and first sittings in the seats in the synagogues, and first places in the feasts.
12:40 They who eat the houses of the widows, and in pretence prolonged they pray; these will receive more judgement.'
12:41 And having sat opposite the treasury, he was seeing how the multitudes threw money (lit. brass) into the treasury: and many rich (men) were throwing many (pieces).
12:42 And a poor widow having come, threw two farthings, which make (lit. is) a kondrantes.
12:43 And having called his disciples, he said to them: 'Verily I say to you, that this poor widow threw (more) than all these who throw into the treasury:
12:44 for all threw from their superfluity; but this (one), she, from her deficiency, threw everything which she had, all her life.'
13:1 And (as he is) coming from the temple, one of his disciples said to him Teacher, seest thou of what kind are these stones, and buildings of what kind?'
13:2 And Jesus said to him: Seest thou these great stones? a stone shall not be left upon a stone here, (which) will not be pulled down.'
13:3 And (as he is) sitting on the mountain of the Olives opposite the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him apart:
13:4 Say to us when these (things) will be? and what is the sign if all these (things) should be going to be fulfilled?'
13:5 And Jesus began to say: Take heed, let not any one lead you astray.
13:6 For there are many (who) will come in my name, saying: "I am Christ; "and they will lead many astray.
13:7 And when ye should hear of wars and rumours of war, be not troubled: it is necessary that they happen; but the end cometh not yet.
13:8 For nation shall rise upon nation, and kingdom upon kingdom; there shall be earthquakes in different places; there shall be famines: (a) beginning of the pangs are these.
13:9 But take ye heed to yourselves: they will deliver you to councils; and in the synagogues ye will be beaten; and made to stand before governors and kings because of me, for a witness to them and all the nations.
13:10 The gospel must, first be preached.
13:11 And if they bring you (to judgement), delivering you up, do not take care beforehand what ye will speak: but that which will be given to you in that hour, this is that which ye will speak: for that which will speak (is) not ye, but it is the Holy Spirit.
13:12 And a brother shall deliver (up) a brother to (the) death, and a father shall deliver (up) a son; and sons will rise upon fathers, and will kill them.
13:13 And ye shall become hated by all (lit. all hating you) because of my name: but he who will hold on until the end (lit. out), this is he who will be saved.
13:14 But if ye see the abomination of the desolation standing where it is not lawful--he who readeth, let him understand--then they who are in Judea, let them flee upon the mountains:
13:15 he who is upon (the) housetop, make him not come down, nor make him enter to take away anything from his house:
13:16 and he who is in (the) field, make him not come back to take away his garment.
13:17 But woe to them who are with child, and them who give suck in those days!
13:18 And pray that not in (the) winter may be your flight.
13:19 For those days shall be tribulation; there was not like it from (the) beginning of the creation which God created until now, and there shall not be again.
13:20 And unless the Lord caused those days to be few, no flesh would have been saved: but because of the chosen whom he chose, he shortened the days.
13:21 And if one say to you: "Lo, Christ (is) here; or there;" believe not.
13:22 For false Christs shall rise and false prophets, and shew (lit. give) signs and wonders for (the) leading astray, if they should be able, even the chosen.
13:23 But ye, take heed, that I said everything beforehand
13:24 But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give his light,
13:25 and the stars shall be falling from (the) heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
13:26 And then they shall see (the) Son of (the) man coming in clouds with great power and glory.
13:27 Then he will send his angels, and will gather his chosen from the four winds, from the end (lit. his end) of (the) earth unto the end (lit. her end) of (the) heaven.
13:28 Now from the fig-tree learn (lit. know) the parable: if now her branches are tender, and put (lit. throw) forth leaves, ye know that summer approacheth;
13:29 thus ye also if ye should see these things having happened, know that he approacheth to the doors.
13:30 Verily I say to you, that this generation shall not pass away, until all these things be accomplished.
13:31 (The) heaven and the earth will pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
13:32 But concerning that day and the hour no one knoweth them, nor angel in (the) heaven, nor (the) Son, except (the) Father.
13:33 Look forth, watch, pray: for ye know not when is the time.
13:34 As a man who went (lit. walked) to (the) foreign (land), who left his house, and he gave to his servants the authority, (and to) each his work, and ordered the porter that he should watch.
13:35 Watch then: for ye know not when the lord of the house cometh, either in the evening, or (the) midnight, or the cock crowing, or in the morning;
13:36 lest he come suddenly and find you sleeping.
13:37 That which I say to you I say to every one, Watch.'
14:1 Now it was the passover and the (feast of the) unleavened after two days: and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how they might lay hold on him with subtilty, and kill him:
14:2 for they were saying: Let us not do it in (the) feast, lest haply there (may) be a tumult among the people.'
14:3 And being in Bethany in (the) house of Simon the leper, sitting at meat, there came a woman having a vessel of ointment of nard, pistike, being of great price: having broken the vessel she poured (lit. having poured) it upon his head.
14:4 But some were murmuring with one another, saying: Wherefore was this waste of this ointment made?
14:5 For it was possible to sell this (for) above three hundred staters, and give them to the poor.' And they were (imperf.) indignant against her.
14:6 But Jesus said to them: Permit her, why trouble ye her? for a good work she worked on (lit. in) me.
14:7 Always the poor are with you, and if ye wish it is possible for you to do good to them always; but I am with you not always.
14:8 That which she received she did: for she anointed my body beforehand with this ointment for my embalming.
14:9 Verily I say to you, that (in) the place in which this gospel will be preached in the whole world, that also which this (woman) did shall be spoken of for a memorial to her.'
14:10 And Judas (the) Iscariot, the one of the twelve, went to the chief priests that he might deliver him to them.
14:11 And they, having heard, rejoiced, and gave to him silver. And he was seeking how he will deliver him (up) conveniently.
14:12 And (on) the first day of the unleavened, when they slay the passover, his disciples said to him: 'Whither wishest thou that we go and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover?'
14:13 And he sent two of his disciples, and said to them: Go to the city, and there will meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water: walk after him:
14:14 and (at) the place into which he will go, say to the owner-ofthe-house, that the Teacher said: "Where was the guest-chamber (lit, rest place), the place in which I shall (lit. will) eat the passover with my disciples?"
14:15 And he will show to you a large room (lit. place) aloft, spread, prepared: and prepare it for us there.'
14:16 And his disciples came out, and came to the city, and found according as he said to them: and they prepared the passover.
14:17 And evening having come, he came with the twelve.
14:18 And (as they are) sitting at meat and eating, Jesus said to them: Verily I say to you, that one of (lit. from) you will deliver me (up), (one) of them who eat with me.'
14:19 They began to be grieved, and to say to him one by one: Is it I?'
14:20 And he said to them: One of the twelve, who dipped his hand with me in the dish.
14:21 Because (the) Son of (the) man indeed will go, according as it is written concerning him: but woe to that man by whom (the) Son of (the) man will be delivered (up)! it were good for him (if) that man had not been (lit. they bare him not) born.'
14:22 And (as they were) eating, Jesus having taken bread, having blessed it, brake it, and gave to them, and he said: Take: this is my body.'
14:23 Having taken a cup, he gave thanks, he gave to them: and they drank of (lit. in) it, all.
14:24 And he said to them: This is my blood of the testament, which will be shed for many, for (the) forgiving of their sins.
14:25 Verily I say to you, that I shall not drink of (the) fruit of this vine, until that day when I should drink it new in the kingdom of God.'
14:26 And having blessed, they came out to the mountain of the Olives.
14:27 And Jesus said to them: Ye will be all offended: because it is written, that I shall (lit. will) smite the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.
14:28 But after my rising, I shall (lit. will) go before you to Galilee.'
14:29 But Peter said to him: Even if all should be offended, yet not I.'
14:30 And Jesus said to him: Verily I say to thee, that thou to-day, in this night, before a cock crow twice, wilt deny me three times.'
14:31 But he was speaking excessively: Even if it should come about that I die with thee, I shall not deny thee.' And thus again were they all saying.
14:32 And they came to a garden (lit. field) the name of which is Gethsemani: and he said to his disciples: Sit here, while I pray.'
14:33 And he took away with him Peter and James and John, and began to be troubled, and grieved.
14:34 And he said to them: My soul is pained unto (the) death: abide here, and watch.'
14:35 And having passed on a little, he was throwing himself down upon (the) earth, and was praying, that if it is possible, the hour might pass away from him.
14:36 And he was saying: Abba, Father, it is possible for everything with thee; let the cup pass away from me: but not as I will, but as thou wilt.'
14:37 And he came, he found them sleeping, and he said to Peter: 'Simon, sleepest thou? Couldest thou not watch with me for an hour?
14:38 Watch then, and pray, that ye come not into temptation: the spirit indeed is ready, but the flesh is weak.'
14:39 And again having gone (away) he was praying, he said the same word.
14:40 And he came again, he found them sleeping, for their eyes were (imperf.) heavy; and they were not knowing what they will answer him.
14:41 And he came the third time, and said to them: Sleep on: the hour came; lo, (the) Son of (the) man will be delivered to (the) hands of the sinners.
14:42 Rise, let us go; lo, he who will deliver me (up), approached.'
14:43 And immediately, (as he is) yet speaking, came Judas, one of the twelve, and a multitude being with him, with swords and staves (lit. pieces of wood), from the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.
14:44 Because he who will deliver him (up) gave a sign to them, saying: He, whose mouth I shall (lit. will) kiss, is he; lay hold on him, and take him (away) safely.'
14:45 And having come, immediately he came to him, and said: Rabbi;' and he kissed his mouth.
14:46 And they put forth (lit. brought) their hands upon him, and laid hold on him.
14:47 But one of them who stood (by) drew the sword, and he (lit. who) gave a blow to (the) servant of the chief priest, and took off his ear.
14:48 And Jesus answered, he said to them: Came ye out as coming after a robber, with swords and staves (as above) to take (lit. catch) me?
14:49 I was (imperf.) with you daily teaching in the temple, and ye laid not hold on me. But that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.'
14:50 And having left him, they all fled.
14:51 And there was a young man walking after him, being clad with a linen cloth upon his naked (body): and they laid hold on him;
14:52 but he left behind the linen cloth, he fled naked.
14:53 And they took Jesus to the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.
14:54 And Peter was walking after him afar off, unto within the court of the chief priest; and he was sitting together with the officers, and is warming himself at the light (of the fire).
14:55 Now the chief priest and the whole council were seeking for witness against Jesus for (the) killing him; and they were not finding.
14:56 For many were bearing false witness against him, and their witness (pl.) was not agreeing together.
14:57 And some having risen bare false witness against him, saying:
14:58 We heard him saying: "I shall (lit. will) pull down this temple this (which is) built with hands, and in (lit. through) three days I shall (lit. will) build another not built with hands."'
14:59 Not even thus was (imperf.) their witness (sing.) agreeing together.
14:60 And the chief priest rose (up) into (the) midst, he asked Jesus saying: Answerest thou not anything, as to (what) these bear witness against thee?'
14:61 But he was holding his peace, and answered not anything. Again the chief priest asked him, and said to him:'Art thou Christ, (the) Son of him who is blessed?'
14:62 And Jesus said: I am: and ye shall see (the) Son of (the) man sitting on (the) right hand of the power, and coming with the clouds of (the) heaven.'
14:63 And the chief priest, having rent his garments, said: What need have ye of witnesses again?
14:64 Ye heard the blasphemy: what appears to you?' And they all condemned him, that he is guilty of (the) death.
14:65 And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say to him: Prophesy to us, who beat thee now, Christ?' And the officers received him with blows-of-their-hands (doubtful word).
14:66 And Peter being down in the court, there came one of the maidservants of the chief priest;
14:67 and having seen Peter warming himself, and having looked upon him, said to him: Thou also wast (imperf.) with Jesus of Nazareth (lit. the Nazêreos).'
14:68 But he denied, saying: 'I neither know nor understand (lit. know) what thou sayest.' And he came forth to the place which was outside of the court.
14:69 And, having seen him, the other (maid) said to them who stood (by): This is one of them.'
14:70 But he again denied. After a little, again they who stood (by) were saying to Peter: Truly thou (art) one of them; for thou (art) a Galilaean.'
14:71 But he began to curse and swear: I know this man not, of whom ye speak (lit. say).'
14:72 And a cock crew (the) second time. And Peter remembered the word as Jesus said to him, that before a cock crow twice, thou wilt deny me three times. And having begun (lit. thrown his hand), he wept.
15:1 And immediately the chief priests with the elders and the scribes and the whole council took (lit. counselled) counsel early; they bound Jesus, they took him, they delivered him to Pilate.
15:2 And Pilate asked him: Art thou (the) king of the Jews?' And he having answered, said to him:' 'Thou sayest.'
15:3 And the chief priests were accusing him much.
15:4 And Pilate again was asking him, saying: Answerest thou not anything? see how much they accuse thee.'
15:5 But Jesus no longer answered anything; so that Pilate wondered.
15:6 Now at (the) feast he was releasing one, (who is) bound, to them, whom they ask.
15:7 And he who is called Barabbas' was (imperf.) bound, with them who made a tumult, they who were committing murder in (the) tumult.
15:8 And, having come up, the multitude began to ask (him to do) according as he was doing to them.
15:9 And Pilate answered them, saying: 'Do ye wish that I should release to you (the) king of the Jews?'
15:10 For he was knowing that they delivered him (up) because of envy.
15:11 But the chief priests moved the multitude, that he should rather release Barabbas to them.
15:12 And Pilate, having answered, said to them: What then shall (lit. will) I do to him whom ye call (lit. say to) "(The) king of the Jews?"'
15:13 And they again cried out: Crucify him.'
15:14 For Pilate was saying to them: Why, what evil did he?' But they the more were crying out: Crucify him.'
15:15 And Pilate, wishing to do the will of the multitude, released Barabbas to them, and he delivered Jesus to scourge him, that they might crucify him.
15:16 And the soldiers took him into the court of the Prætorium; and they called the whole band upon him.
15:17 And they clothed him with a purple garment, and they plaited a crown of (lit. from) thorns, they set it upon him;
15:18 and they began to salute him: Hail, (the) king of the Jews.'
15:19 And they struck his head with a reed, and they were spitting in his face, and throwing themselves upon their knees to worship him.
15:20 And when they (had) mocked him, they stripped him of the purple garment, and clothed him with his garments, and brought him forth that they might crucify him.
15:21 And they compelled to go with (them) one passing by, Simon the Cyrenian, coming from (the) field, (the) father of Alexander and Rufus, that he might take up his cross.
15:22 And they brought him to the place of Golgotha, this which they interpret: The place of the skull.'
15:23 And they gave to him wine mingled with gall: but he received it not.
15:24 And they crucified him, and divided his garments among them, having cast lot for them, as to who will take them away.
15:25 And it was (the) third hour, and they crucified him.
15:26 And the superscription of his accusation was (imperf.) written: (The) king of the Jews.'
15:27 And they crucified two robbers also with him; one on the right hand, (and) one on the left hand of him.
15:28 Omited
15:29 And they who were passing by were blaspheming him, shaking their heads, and saying: Thou (lit. he) who wilt pull down the temple, and wilt build it in three days,
15:30 save thyself, having come down from the cross.'
15:31 Thus the chief priests also mocking with one another, saying: He saveth others; it is not possible for him to save himself.
15:32 Christ, (the) king of Israel, let him come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe.' And they who were crucified with him were reproaching him.
15:33 And (the) sixth hour having come, there was darkness upon all the earth until (the) ninth hour.
15:34 And at (the) ninth hour Jesus cried out with a great voice: Eloi, eloi, lema sabachtliani?' which for its interpretation is: My God, my God, wherefore didst thou leave me?'
15:35 And some of them who stood (by), having heard, were saying: See, he calleth Elias.'
15:36 One, having run, filled a sponge with vinegar, placed it upon a reed, gave him to drink, saying: Let him (be); and let us see if (lit. that) Elias cometh and bringeth him down.'
15:37 And Jesus, having called with a great voice, gave (up) the spirit.
15:38 And the veil of the temple was rent in two from (the) top down(wards).
15:39 And the centurion, who stood opposite him, having seen that he gave (up) the spirit, said: Truly this man was (the) Son of God.'
15:40 And there were also women seeing afar off, among whom was (imperf.) Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of James the little, and (the) mother of Josêtos, and Salome;
15:41 who (lit. these who) were following him, when he was (lit. is being) in Galilee, and were ministering to him; and many others who came with him up to Jerusalem.
15:42 And now evening having come, since it was the Preparation, which was before (the) sabbath,
15:43 came (lit. having come) Joseph the (man) from AriMatthewheas, being a councillor of honourable estate, who (lit. this who) himself also was looking for the kingdom of God; he dared, he went within to Pilate, and asked for (the) body of Jesus.
15:44 And Pilate wondered that be already died: and having called the centurion, he asked him whether he had just died.
15:45 And having known from the centurion, he gave the body of Jesus to Joseph.
15:46 And having bought a linen cloth, he brought him down, he wrapped him in a linen cloth, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock; and he rolled the stone to the door (lit. mouth) of the sepulchre.
15:47 And Mary the Magdalene and Mary of Josêtos were seeing where he was laid.
16:1 And the sabbath having been kept, Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of James, and Salomê went, they bought spices, that they might come and anoint him.
16:2 And in the morning very (early) on (the) first (lit. one) of the sabbaths they came to the sepulchre, (the) sun having risen.
16:3 And they were saying to one another: Who will roll the stone for us from the door (lit. mouth) of the sepulchre?'
16:4 and having lifted up their eyes, they saw the stone, that it was rolled (away): for it was very great.
16:5 And having gone into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right hand, clad in a white robe; and they feared.
16:6 And he said to them: 'Fear not: ye seek for Jesus the Nazarene, who was crucified: he rose; he is not here: lo, the place in which they laid him.
16:7 But go, say to his disciples and Peter, that he will go before you to Galilee: ye will see him there.'
16:8 And they came forth, they fled from the sepulchre; for trembling had seized them and amazement; and they said not anything to any one; for they were fearing.
16:9 And having risen indeed early on the first day of the sabbaths, he appeared first to Mary the Magdalene, from whom he cast the seven demons.
16:10 She (lit. this who is there) went, she told them who had been (imperf.) with him, mourning and weeping.
16:11 And they, having heard that he liveth, and that we saw him, were (imperf.) unbelieving.
16:12 And after these (things) again two of them were walking on a road, he manifested himself to them in another form in (the) field.
16:13 And these also went, they told the rest: and these again believed them not.
16:14 And at (the) end, (as) the eleven disciples were sitting-at-meat, he manifested himself to them; and he was reproaching them for their unbelief and their hardness of heart, because they believed not them who saw him, having risen.
16:15 And he said to them: Go to the world, and in everything preach the Gospel to the whole creation.
16:16 He who believed and who was baptised shall be saved: but he who was unbelieving will be condemned.
16:17 And these signs shall follow (lit. walk after) them who believe in my name: they shall cast out demons; they shall speak in languages;
16:18 and they shall lift serpents in their hands; even if they should eat any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; and they shall lay their hands upon sick persons, and they shall be cured.'
16:19 The Lord Jesus then, after his speaking to them, was taken up to (the) heaven, and sat on the right hand of(the) Father.
16:20 And they, having come out, preached in all places, and the Lord was working with them, and (is) confirming the word by the signs which follow (lit. walk after) them, for ever and ever (lit. unto age of all the ages). Amen.
16:21