1:2 Paul, (the) apostle of Christ Jesus through (the) wish of God according to the promise of (the) life which is in Christ Jesus,
1:3 to Timotheos my beloved child, (the) grace, (the) mercy, (the) peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
1:4 I give thanks to God whom I serve from my ancestors, in pure conscience, as remembering thee unfailingly in my prayers by night and day,
1:5 loving to see thee, remembering thy tears, that I may be filled with joy.
1:6 Remembering the faith which is in thee unfeigned; this which dwelt first in (the) mother of thy mother Lōēdē, and thy mother Eunikē; but I am persuaded that it dwelt in thee also.
1:7 Therefore I remind thee that thou should revivify the grace of God, which is this which is in thee, this which was given to thee through my laying on of hand.
1:8 For God giveth not to us a spirit of fear, but of [a] power and [a] love and [a] prudence.
1:9 Be not ashamed then of the witness of our Lord, nor of me also the prisoner of his: but suffer with the Gospel according to the power of God;
1:10 he who saved us, and he called us in a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his foreordaining alone, and his grace which he gave to us in Christ Jesus before the eternal times,
1:11 but it was manifested now by the manifestation of our saviour Jesus Christ. He having done away indeed with (the) death; but he caused (the) life and [the] incorruption to enlighten through the Gospel,
1:12 this of which I (pron.) was appointed for proclaimer and apostle and teacher of the Gentiles.
1:13 Therefore I suffer these (pains), but I am not ashamed of it, for I know him whom I believed, and I am persuaded that it is possible for him to keep my deposit unto that day.
1:14 Put by thee a form of sound words, these which thou heardest from me, in [a] faith and [a] love, which is in Christ Jesus.
1:15 The good deposit keep through the holy spirit, which dwelleth in us.
1:16 Thou knowest this, that they who are in Asia all turned away from me, of whom are Phygelos and Ermogenēs.
1:17 But the Lord shall give [a] mercy to (the) house of Onesyphoros because he gave rest to me many times, and my chain he was not ashamed of;
1:18 but having come to Rōmē, he hastened to seek for me, and he found me.
1:19 But the Lord shall give to him, to find [a] mercy with the Lord in that day; all the ministries which he did to me in Ephesos thou (pron.) knowest the more.
2:1 Thou then, my child, be encouraged in the grace which is in Christ Jesus.
2:2 The things which thou heardest from me through many witnesses, these commits to faithful men, those (lit. these) who will be worthy to teach others.
2:3 Share in suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
2:4 No one being soldier entangleth himself in the works of this life; that he may please him who armed him.
2:5 But if (any) one should go to (the) place of contending, he is not crowned unless he contendeth lawfully.
2:6 The husbandman who toileth must take first from the fruits.
2:7 Understand the things which I say; for the Lord shall give to thee a knowledge in all things.
2:8 Remember Jesus Christ who rose from them who are dead, from (the) seed of David according to my Gospel:
2:9 that in which I suffer even unto bonds as an evil doer; but (the) word of God is not bound.
2:10 Therefore I am patient in all things because of the elect, that they may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with the eternal glory.
2:11 Faithful is (the) word; for if we died with him, then we shall (lit. will) live with him also:
2:12 if we shall (lit. will) be patient, then we shall (lit. will) reign with him also: if we shall (lit. will) deny him, he also will deny us:
2:13 if we shall (lit. will) be unbelieving, that one will stay being faithful; for it is not possible that he should deny himself.
2:14 Remind them of these things, witnessing before God, not to dispute in (the) word for anything in which there is not gain, unto a ruining of them who hear.
2:15 Haste thee to present thyself as one chosen for God, as a workman (who) is not ashamed, dividing (the) word of the truth rightly.
2:16 But avoid profane and empty stories: for they advance further in ungodliness,
2:17 and their word findeth pasture as a canker which eateth: from whom is Hymeneos and Phyletos:
2:18 these who agree not with (the) truth, saying that (the) resurrection has already happened, and they turn (the) faith of others away.
2:19 The firm foundation however of God standeth, having this seal: The Lord knew them who are his: let all who say (the) name of the Lord abstain from (the) wrongdoing.
2:20 But in a great house not only vessels of gold and silver (vessels are those) which are in it; but there are (vessels of) wood also and earthenware; some indeed being unto (the) honour, but others being unto [a] dishonour.
2:21 If then (any) one should cleanse himself from all these, he shall be a vessel unto (the) honour cleansed, serviceable for his master, prepared unto all good works.
2:22 The youthful lusts avoid, but run after [the] righteousness, [the] faith, [the] love, [the] peace with all who cry unto (the) name of the Lord out of a cleansed heart.
2:23 But the questions of foolishness and ignorance avoid. Thou shalt know this, that they gender contentions:
2:24 but a servant of the Lord ought not to dispute, but to be meek with all, apt to teach, forbearing the evil,
2:25 teaching in [a] meekness them who oppose him, that perhaps God might give to them [a] repentance some time to cause them to know the truth,
2:26 and be sober from the snare with which the devil caught them, being subjected by him to the will of that (one).
3:1 But this know, that in the last days evil times shall be.
3:2 For [the] men shall be loving themselves alone, lovers of silver, boastful, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy,
3:3 uncompassionate, inconstant, slanderers, not able to control themselves, receiving not teaching, loving not the good,
3:4 being traitors, headstrong, haughty, being lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God;
3:5 having (the) form of [the] godliness, but denying its power: [but] these [others] avoid.
3:6 But among these are they who sink into the houses, taking captive women full of sin, leading them in lusts of many kinds,
3:7 learning always, and they are not able ever to come into (the) knowledge of the truth.
3:8 But as Jannēs and Jambrēs who opposed Moses, thus these others also oppose the truth; men whose heart is corrupt, reprobate about the faith.
3:9 But they will not advance any further; for their ignorance will be manifest to all, according as that of the others became.
3:10 But thou walkedst after my doctrine, after my form, after my foreordaining, my faith, my longsuffering, my love, my patience;
3:11 all the persecutions and these pains which happened to me in (the) Antiochia, in Ikonion, in Lystrois; all the persecutions which I received; the Lord saved me from them all.
3:12 But all who wish to live in [a] godliness in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
3:13 But evil men and impostors shall come forward the more in the evil, deceiving and being deceived.
3:14 But thou (pron.) abide in the things which thou learnedst, and in which thou trustedst,
3:15 knowing through whom thou learnedst; and from being a child holy writings (are those) which thou knowest, these for which it is possible to give teaching to thee unto [the] salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
3:16 All scriptures of inspiration of God are profitable unto [a] doctrine, unto [a] reproof, unto [a] correction, unto [an] instruction which is in [the] righteousness:
3:17 that (the) man of God may be prepared and established in all good works.
4:1 I witness before God and Christ Jesus who will judge them who are living and them who are dead, and (by) his manifestation and his kingdom;
4:2 proclaim the word, be upon them in season, out of season; reprove, exhort, rebuke in all longsuffering and teaching.
4:3 For times will happen when they shall not receive sound doctrine, but according to their own lusts drawing to themselves teachers, tickling their ears;
4:4 their hearing indeed they shall turn from (the) truth, but they shall turn aside after the fables.
4:5 But thou (pron.) be sober in all things, suffer, work as a preacher of good tidings, fulfil thy ministry.
4:6 For I (pron.) now shall (lit. will) be removed, and (the) time of my dissolution drew near.
4:7 The good strife I strove. The course I completed. The faith I kept.
4:8 Henceforth is laid (up) for me the crown of [the] righteousness, that which the Lord will give to me in that day, the righteous judge; but not only to me alone, but also all who loved his manifestation.
4:9 Haste thee to come to me quickly:
4:10 for Dēmas forsook me, having loved this present age, he went to Thessalonikia; Kriskēs to [the] Galatia; Titos to DalMatthewia;
4:11 Loukas alone (it is) who is with me. Markos, take him away, bring him with thee, for he is serviceable to me unto [a] ministry.
4:12 But Tychikos I sent to Ephesos.
4:13 The cloak which I left in Trōas with Karpō, bring it (when thou) art coming, and the books also, especially the parchments.
4:14 Alexandros, the smith, did much evil to me: the Lord shall give recompense to him according to his works.
4:15 This (man), from whom keep thou thyself also, for he greatly opposed my words.
4:16 In my first defence he let not any come to me, but they all forsook me. It shall not be reckoned to them.
4:17 But the Lord stood with me: he gave power to me; that through me the proclaiming might be fulfilled, And all the Gentiles might hear that I was saved from the mouth of a lion.
4:18 The Lord shall preserve me from every evil work, and shall bring me safe into his kingdom of (the) heaven: he whose is the glory unto age of the ages. Amen.
4:19 Salute Priskylla and Akylla, and (the) house of Onēsiphoros.
4:20 Erastos stayed in Korinthos. But Trophēmos I left in Melitos sick.
4:21 Haste thee to come before the winter. Euboulos saluteth thee, and Pioudēs and Nilos and Klaudios and all the brethren.
4:22 The Lord Jesus Christ with thy spirit. (The) grace with you.
4:23