Genesis

Judges

Epistle to the Philippians

Apocalypse

Psalms
Suspected title    : 3 : A Psalm of David, when he fled from the presence of his son Abessalom.
Suspected title    : 4 : For the End, a Song of David among the Psalms.
Suspected title    : 5 : For the end, a Psalm of David, concerning her that inherits.
Suspected title    : 6 : For the End, a Psalm of David among the Hymns for the eighth.
Suspected title    : 7 : A Psalm of David, which he sang to the Lord because of the words of Chusi the Benjamite.
Suspected title    : 8 : For the end, concerning the wine-presses, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 9 : For the end, a Psalm of David, concerning the secrets of the Son.
Suspected title    : 10 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 11 : For the end, A Psalm of David, upon the eighth.
Suspected title    : 12 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 13 : For the end, Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 14 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 15 : A writing of David.
Suspected title    : 16 : A prayer of David.
Suspected title    : 17 : For the end, a Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord; the words which he spoke to the Lord, even the words of this Song, in the day in which the Lord delivered him out the hand of all his enemies, and out the hand of Saul: and he said:
Suspected title    : 18 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 19 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 20 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 21 : For the end, concerning the morning aid, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 22 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 23 : A Psalm for David on the first day of the week.
Suspected title    : 24 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 25 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 26 : A Psalm of David, before he was anointed.
Suspected title    : 27 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 28 : A Psalm of David on the occasion of the solemn assembly of the Tabernacle.
Suspected title    : 29 : For the end, a Psalm and Song at the dedication of the house of David.
Suspected title    : 30 : For the end, a Psalm of David, an utterance of extreme fear.
Suspected title    : 31 : A Psalm of instruction by David.
Suspected title    : 32 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 33 : A Psalm of David, when he changed his countenance before Abimelech; and he let him go, and he departed.
Suspected title    : 34 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 35 : For the end, by David the servant of the Lord.
Suspected title    : 36 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 37 : A Psalm of David for remembrance concerning the Sabbath-day.
Suspected title    : 38 : For the end, a Song of David, to Idithun.
Suspected title    : 39 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 40 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 41 : For the end, a Psalm for instruction, for the sons of Core.
Suspected title    : 42 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 43 : For the end, a Psalm for instruction, for the sons of Core.
Suspected title    : 44 : For the end, for alternate strains by the sons of Core; for instruction, a Song concerning the beloved.
Suspected title    : 45 : For the end, for the sons of Core; a Psalm concerning secret things.
Suspected title    : 46 : For the end, a Psalm for the sons of Core.
Suspected title    : 47 : A Psalm of praise for the sons of Core on the second day of the week.
Suspected title    : 48 : For the end, a Psalm for the sons of Core.
Suspected title    : 49 : A Psalm for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 50 : For the end, a Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came to him, when he had gone to Bersabee.
Suspected title    : 51 : For the end, a Psalm of instruction by David, when Doec the Idumean came and told Saul, and said to him, David is gone to the house of Abimelech.
Suspected title    : 52 : For the end, a Psalm of David upon Maeleth, of instruction.
Suspected title    : 53 : For the end, among Hymns of instruction by David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Lo, is not David hid with us?
Suspected title    : 54 : For the end, among Hymns of instruction by David.
Suspected title    : 55 : For the end, concerning the people that were removed from the sanctuary, by David for a memorial, when the Philistines caught him in Geth.
Suspected title    : 56 : For the end. Destroy not: by David, for a memorial, when he fled from the presence of Saul to the cave.
Suspected title    : 57 : For the end. Destroy not: by David, for a memorial.
Suspected title    : 58 : For the end. Destroy not: by David for a memorial, when Saul sent, and watched his house to kill him.
Suspected title    : 59 : For the end, for them that shall yet be changed; for an inscription by David for instruction, when he had burned Mesopotamia of Syria, and Syria Sobal, and Joab had returned and smitten in the valley of salt twelve thousand.
Suspected title    : 60 : For the end, among the Hymns of David.
Suspected title    : 61 : For the end, a Psalm of David for Idithun.
Suspected title    : 62 : A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Idumea.
Suspected title    : 63 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 64 : For the end, a Psalm and Song of David.
Suspected title    : 65 : For the end, a Song of Psalm of resurrection.
Suspected title    : 66 : For the end, a Psalm of David among the Hymns.
Suspected title    : 67 : For the end, a Psalm of a Song by David.
Suspected title    : 68 : For the end, a Psalm of David, for alternate strains.
Suspected title    : 69 : For the end, by David for a remembrance, that the Lord may save me.
Suspected title    : 70 : By David, a Psalm sung by the sons of Jonadab, and the first that were taken captive.
Suspected title    : 71 : For Solomon.
Suspected title    : 72 : A Psalm for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 73 : A Psalm of instruction for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 74 : For the end, Destroy not, a Psalm of a Song for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 75 : For the end, among the Hymns, a Psalm for Asaph; a Song for the Assyrian.
Suspected title    : 76 : For the end, for Idithun, a Psalm of Asaph.
Suspected title    : 77 : A Psalm of instruction for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 78 : A Psalm for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 79 : For the end, for alternate strains, a testimony for Asaph, a Psalm concerning the Assyrian.
Suspected title    : 80 : For the end, a Psalm for Asaph, concerning the wine-presses.
Suspected title    : 81 : A Psalm for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 82 : A Song of a Psalm for Asaph.
Suspected title    : 83 : For the end, a Psalm for the sons of Core, concerning the wine-presses.
Suspected title    : 84 : For the end, a Psalm for the sons of Core.
Suspected title    : 85 : A Prayer of David.
Suspected title    : 86 : A Psalm of a Song for the sons of Core.
Suspected title    : 87 : A song of a Psalm for the sons of Core for the end, upon Maeleth for responsive strains, of instruction for Æman the Israelite.
Suspected title    : 88 : A Psalm of instruction for Ætham the Israelite.
Suspected title    : 89 : A Prayer of Moses the man of God.
Suspected title    : 90 : Praise of a Song, by David.
Suspected title    : 91 : A Psalm of a Song for the Sabbath-day.
Suspected title    : 92 : For the day before the Sabbath, when the land was first inhabited, the praise of a Song by David.
Suspected title    : 93 : A Psalm of David for the fourth day of the week.
Suspected title    : 94 : The praise of a Song by David.
Suspected title    : 95 : When the house was built after the Captivity, a Song of David.
Suspected title    : 96 : For David, when his land is established.
Suspected title    : 97 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 98 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 99 : A Psalm for Thanksgiving.
Suspected title    : 100 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 101 : A Prayer for the Poor; when he is deeply afflicted, and pours out his supplication before the Lord.
Suspected title    : 102 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 103 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 104 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 105 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 106 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 107 : Song of a Psalm by David.
Suspected title    : 108 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 109 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 110 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 111 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 112 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 113 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 115a : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 116 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 117 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 118 : Alleluia. 1
Suspected title    : 119 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 120 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 121 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 122 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 123 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 124 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 125 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 126 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 127 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 128 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 129 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 130 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 131 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 132 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 133 : A Song of Degrees.
Suspected title    : 134 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 135 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 136 : For David, a Psalm of Jeremias.
Suspected title    : 137 : A Psalm for David, of Aggaeus and Zacharias.
Suspected title    : 138 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 139 : For the end, a Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 140 : A Psalm of David.
Suspected title    : 141 : A Psalm of instruction for David, when he was in the cave, —a Prayer.
Suspected title    : 142 : A Psalm of David, when his son pursued him.
Suspected title    : 143 : A Psalm of David concerning Goliad.
Suspected title    : 144 : David’s Psalm of praise.
Suspected title    : 145 : Alleluia, a Psalm of Aggaeus and Zacharias.
Suspected title    : 146 : Alleluia, a Psalm of Aggaeus and Zacharias.
Suspected title    : 147 : Alleluia, a Psalm of Aggaeus and Zacharias.
Suspected title    : 148 : Alleluia, a Psalm of Aggaeus and Zacharias.
Suspected title    : 149 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 150 : Alleluia.
Suspected title    : 151 : This Psalm is a genuine one of David, though supernumerary, composed when he fought in single combat with Goliad.

Song of Songs

Epistle of St. Jude

Amos

Wisdom of Solomon

Haggai

Gospel of St. Matthew

Baruch

Ezekiel

Gospel of St. John

Judith

Second Samuel

Epistle to the Romans

Jeremiah

Epistle to the Hebrews

Second Epistle to the Thessalonians

Epistle to Philemon

Epistle of Jeremiah

Deuteronomy

Epistle to Titus

Hosea

Leviticus
Suspected non-verse: 5:6:4 : which he has found of any kind, about which he swore unjustly, he shall even restore it in full; and he shall add to it a fifth part besides; he shall restore it to him whose it is in the day in which he happens to be convicted.

Proverbs
Suspected non-verse: 29:31:26 : 

Gospel of St. Mark

First Epistle of St. John

Second Epistle of St. Peter

Ruth

Malachi

Second Epistle to Timothy

First Epistle of St. Peter

Second Kings

Numbers

Epistle of St. James

Nahum

Isaiah

Obadiah

Esther
Suspected title    : C : [And he besought the Lord, making mention of all the works of the Lord;
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : And being splendidly arrayed, and having called upon God the Overseer and Preserver of all things, she took her two maids,
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : and she leaned upon one, as a delicate female,
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : and the other followed bearing her train.
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : And she was blooming in the perfection of her beauty; and her face was cheerful, and it were benevolent, but her heart was straitened for fear.
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : And having passed through all the doors, she stood before the king: and he was sitting upon his royal throne, and he had put on all his glorious apparel, covered all over with gold and precious stones, and was very terrible.
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : And having raised his face resplendent with glory, he looked with intense anger: and the queen fell, and changed her colour as she fainted; and she bowed herself upon the head of the maid that went before her.
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : But God changed the spirit of the king gentleness, and in intense feeling he sprang from off his throne, and took her into his arms, until she recovered: and he comforted her with peaceable words,
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : and said to her, What is the matter, Esther? I am thy brother; be of good cheer,
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : thou shalt not die, for our command is openly declared to thee,
Suspected non-verse: D:5:1 : Draw nigh.
Suspected non-verse: D:5:2 : And she said to him, I saw thee, my lord, as an angel of God, and my heart was troubled for fear of thy glory;
Suspected non-verse: D:5:2 : for thou, my lord, art to be wondered at, and thy face is full of grace.
Suspected non-verse: D:5:2 : And while she was speaking, she fainted and fell.
Suspected non-verse: D:5:2 : Then the king was troubled, and all his servants comforted her.
Suspected title    : F : And Mardocheus said, These things have been done of God.

Jonah

Second Chronicles
Suspected title    : 5 : So all the work which Solomon wrought for the house of the Lord was finished. (1) And Solomon brought in the holy things of his father David, the silver, and the gold, and the other vessels, and put them in the treasury of the house of the Lord.

Gospel of St. Luke

Second Epistle of St. John

Job
Suspected non-verse: 42:17b : 

Epistle to the Galatians

Lamentations of Jeremiah

Second Epistle to the Corinthians

First Kings

Exodus

Epistle to the Colossians

First Epistle to the Corinthians

Acts of the Apostles

Micah

Daniel
Suspected non-verse: 3:B:5 : nor kept them, neither done as thou hast commanded us, that it might go well with us.
Suspected non-verse: 3:B:15 : so let our sacrifice be in thy sight this day, and grant that we may wholly go after thee: for they shall not be confounded that put their trust in thee.
Suspected non-verse: 3:B:41 : 

Joshua

First Epistle to Timothy

Joel

First Epistle to the Thessalonians

Tobit

First Chronicles

Zechariah

Ecclesiastes
Suspected title    : 8 : A man’s wisdom will lighten his countenance; but a man of shameless countenance will be hated.

Zephaniah
Suspected title    : 3 : Alas the glorious and ransomed city.

Wisdom of Jesus son of Sirach
Suspected non-verse: 41:42:1 : So shalt thou be truly shamefaced and find favour before all men.
Suspected title    : 42 : Of these things be not thou ashamed, and accept no person to sin thereby:
Suspected non-verse: 45:44:24 : even Moses, beloved of God and men, whose memorial is blessed.

Third Epistle of St. John
Suspected non-verse: 1:The : 

First Samuel
Suspected title    : 21 : and Jonathan went into the city. (1) And David comes to Nomba to Abimelech the priest: and Abimelech was amazed at meeting him, and said to him, Why art thou alone, and nobody with thee?

Epistle to the Ephesians

Habakkuk
