1:1 I. Paul, (the) servant of God, (the) apostle of Jesus Christ according to (the) faith of the elect of God, and (the) knowledge of the truth, according to [the] godliness,
1:2 in a hope of an eternal life, this which God, who cannot lie, promised before the eternal times;
1:3 but he manifested in his times his word in a proclaiming, this with which I was intrusted, according to the commandment of God our saviour;
1:4 to Titos my beloved child according to the fellowship of (the) faith: (the) grace and (the) peace from God (the) Father and Christ Jesus our saviour.
1:5 Therefore I left thee in Krithē, that thou mightest set up the things which were left, and establish presbyters in every city, according as I commanded thee;
1:6 one who is irreproachable being husband of one wife, having children faithful, and they are not under (lit. in) an accusation of dissoluteness, or being insubordinate.
1:7 For it is right that the bishop should be irreproachable, as a steward of God, not being selfwilled, not being a man of anger, not being a winebibber, not being a striker, not being a lover of dishonourable gain,
1:8 being a lover of strangers, lover of the good (singular), prudent, just, holy, being temperate,
1:9 laying hold on the faithful word for the teaching, that he may be able to encourage in the sound teaching and reprove them who contradict.
1:10 For there are many insubordinate and speakers of vanity, deceivers of heart, chiefly they of (the) circumcision.
1:11 These whose mouths ought to be stopped, who turn aside (the) whole of houses, teaching the things which (they) ought not, for a despicable gain.
1:12 But one from them said, a prophet of theirs: 'The Krētēs, sayers of falsehood always, they are evil beasts, they are idle bellies.'
1:13 This witness is true. Because of this reason reprove them severely, that they may be sound in (the) faith,
1:14 and not attend to Jewish fables, and commandments of man, turning them from (the) truth.
1:15 For all things are pure to them who are pure, but they who are defiled and the unbelieving, there is not anything pure to them, but their heart was defiled and their conscience.
1:16 They confess God, that they know him; but in their works they deny him, abominable, dissentient, unserviceable about all good works.
2:1 But thou, speak the things which are comely for the sound doctrine.
2:2 The old men to be watchful, being grave, prudent, sound in (the) faith, in [the] love, in [the] patience.
2:3 Thus also the old women, to be in [a] character reverent, not slanderers, nor enslaved to much wine, being givers of good teaching;
2:4 that they may teach the young women to be lovers (of their) husbands, lovers (of their) children,
2:5 prudent, chaste, the managers of their house, good, being in subjection to their husbands, that the word of God may not be blasphemed.
2:6 Thus also the young men encourage to be prudent:
2:7 making thyself (a) pattern of good works in all things (lit. work); in the doctrine, with (lit. in) [the] uncorruptness, (speaking) a grave word,
2:8 a sound word, uncondemnable; that he who is contrary to us may be ashamed, having not any evil to say against us.
2:9 The servants to be subject to their masters, pleasing them in all things,
2:10 and not to be thieves, but manifesting all good fidelity (lit. faith), that they may adorn the teaching of God our saviour in all things.
2:11 For (the) grace of God our saviour was manifested to every man,
2:12 instructing us that, having denied [the] ungodliness and [the] worldly lusts, we might live in [a] prudence and [a] righteousness and [a] godliness in this present age.
2:13 Looking out forward to the blessed hope, and (the) manifestation of (the) glory of God, the great (one), Christ Jesus our saviour.
2:14 He who gave himself for us, until he saved us from all lawlessness, and purified us to him for a people, permanent, and zealous of good works.
2:15 Speak these things, and encourage, reprove in all authority. Let not any lay hold on thee in [a] knowledge.
3:1 Remind them to be subject to the rulers and the authorities, well pleasing, and be prepared for all good works.
3:2 That they blaspheme not any one, and be not disputers, being fair, manifesting all meekness with all men.
3:3 For we also were being ignorant once, being dissentient, and going astray, enslaved to lusts and pleasures of many kinds, walking in [a] malice and [an] envy, worthy of being hated, hating one another.
3:4 But when was manifested the kindness and the love toward man of God our saviour,
3:5 not from our works which we did in [a] righteousness, but according to his mercy he saved us, through the washing of the regeneration and the renewing,
3:6 this which he poured upon us richly through Jesus Christ our saviour;
3:7 that we might be justified in the grace of that one, and become heirs according to a hope of an eternal life.
3:8 Faithful is (the) word, and concerning these [other] things I wish to cause thee to assure thyself, that they who believed God should take care to maintain the good works. These (things) are good and they are profitable to [the] men:
3:9 but [the] questions of foolishness, and [the] genealogies, and [the] strifes, and [the] disputes about the law avoid; for these (things) are unprofitable and they are vain.
3:10 An heretical man, after once and twice admonishing him, refuse;
3:11 knowing that such a man is turned (away) and sinneth, having condemned himself.
3:12 If we should send Artema to thee, or Tichikos, haste thee to come to me to Nikopolis: for I ordained to spend the winter there.
3:13 Zēnas the lawyer and Apollō send in [a] haste, that they may not be deficient of anything.
3:14 Let those who are ours learn to take care for good works unto the necessary needs, that they may not be unfruitful.
3:15 All who are with me salute thee. Salute them who love us in (the) faith. (The) grace with you all.
3:16