1:1 Paul, (the) apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, to all the saints who are in Ephesos, and faithful who (are) in Christ Jesus.
1:2 (The) grace to you and (the) peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:3 Blessed is God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who blessed us in all spiritual blessing in the (places) of the heavens in Christ.
1:4 According as he chose us in him before (the) foundation of the world, that we might be holy, being stainless before him in [a] love:
1:5 he having foreordained us unto [a] son-ship through Jesus Christ into him, according to the good pleasure of his will,
1:6 unto a praise of (the) glory of his grace, this which he granted to us in his beloved,
1:7 he through whose blood we received the redemption, the forgiveness of our transgressions. According to the riches of his kindness,
1:8 this which abounded into us, in all wisdom and all understanding,
1:9 he having shewn to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, this which he pre-established in him,
1:10 unto a dispensation of (the) fulness of the times, To complete all things in Christ, those which are in the heavens, and those which are upon the earth; in him,
1:11 he (lit. this) in whom we were made an heritage, having ordained us from (the) first. According to the pre-establishment of him who worketh in every work according to the counsel of his will;
1:12 that we should be unto a praise of his glory, namely they who were beforehand in hoping in Christ:
1:13 he (lit. this) in whom ye also,--ye heard (the) word of the truth, the Gospel of our salvation,--he (lit. this) in whom having believed ye were sealed in the holy spirit of the promise,
1:14 which is (the) earnest of the inheritance unto a redemption of the life-giving a, unto a praise of his glory.
1:15 Therefore I also having heard of the faith, which is among you, in our Lord Jesus, and (among) all the saints,
1:16 I cease not giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers,
1:17 that God of our Lord Jesus, the Father of (the) glory, might give to you a spirit of wisdom and a revelation in his knowledge;
1:18 to cause the eyes of your heart to enlighten, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what is the riches of (the) glory of his inheritance in the saints,
1:19 and what is the abundance of the greatness of his power into us, namely those who believe. According to the working of (the) strength of his power
1:20 which (sc. the power) he worked in Christ, having raised him from them who are dead; and he made him sit at his right hand, in the (places) of the heavens,
1:21 above all rule, and all authority, and all power, and all (the) dominion, and all names which are named, not only in this age, but (a.) also in that which cometh:
1:22 and he caused all things to be subject below his feet, and he gave him as head of the church (more) than them all,
1:23 which is his body, the fulness of him to whom all things belong, being filled with all things.
2:1 And ye also being dead in your transgressions and your sins,
2:2 in which ye were walking once according to (the) age of this world, according to (the) ruler of (the) authority of the air, of the spirit, this which worketh now in the sons of the disobedience;
2:3 among whom we all were walking once in the lusts of (the) flesh, doing the wishes of the flesh and the thoughts of heart, and we were being by nature children of (the) anger, as (the) rest also.
2:4 But God is rich in (the) mercy, because of his great love, this in which he loved us:
2:5 and (to us) being dead in our transgressions he gave life in Christ: in [a] grace, them, ye were saved:
2:6 and he raised us with him, and made us sit with him in the (places) of the heavens, in Christ Jesus;
2:7 that he might manifest in the ages which come the abounding riches of his grace in [a] kindness about us in Christ Jesus.
2:8 For in [a] grace ye were saved through [a] faith; and this is not anything from yourselves; the gift is of God:
2:9 not from works, that no one may boast himself.
2:10 For we are (being) a making of his, he having created us in Christ Jesus for good works, which God before prepared, that we might walk in them.
2:11 Therefore remember that ye, namely the Gentiles once in (the) flesh, who are called the uncircumcision' by that which is called (the) circumcision' in (the) flesh made by hand;
2:12 that ye were being at that time outside of Christ, being strange to the commonwealth of Israel, and strange to the covenants of the promise, not having hope, and being without God in the world.
2:13 But now in Christ Jesus, ye, namely they who were far off once, drew near in (the) blood of Christ.
2:14 For he is your peace, he who made the two one, and he pulled down the middle part of the barrier, having pulled down the enmity in his flesh,
2:15 he did away with (the) law of the commandments in the decrees, that he might create (of) the two in himself one new man, making [a] peace;
2:16 and might reconcile the two in one body to God through the cross, having killed the enmity in it.
2:17 And he came, he preached good tidings to you of [a] peace, namely those who were far off, and [a] peace to those who were near:
2:18 because through him we, namely the two together, have the access in one spirit to the Father.
2:19 So then ye (are) no more strangers and sojourners, but fellow citizens of the saints, and they of the household of God,
2:20 built upon the foundation of the apostles and the prophets, Christ Jesus being head corner stone unto it;
2:21 he (lit. this) in whom the whole building constructed will grow unto a holy temple in the Lord;
2:22 he (lit. this) in whom ye also are sharing in being built unto a dwelling-place of God in the spirit.
3:1 Therefore I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you, namely the Gentiles,
3:2 if ye heard the dispensation of the grace of God which is given to me unto you:
3:3 that according to a revelation the mystery was shown to me, according as I wrote before to you in few (words),
3:4 according to that which it is possible for you, wishing' to know my understanding in the mystery of Christ;
3:5 this which was not manifested to generations of (the) sons of [the] men, As now it was revealed to his holy apostles and his prophets in the spirit;
3:6 to cause the Gentiles to be fellow heirs and fellow (members of the) body, sharing the promise, which is in Christ Jesus through the Gospel,
3:7 this of (lit. to) which I became minister, according to the free gift of the grace of God which is given to me according to the working of his power.
3:8 I am he who is less than all the saints: this grace was given to me to preach good tidings to the Gentiles of the riches of Christ, of which there is no end;
3:9 and to give (the) light to all men, as to what is the dispensation of the mystery, this which was hid since the ages in God, be (lit. this) who created all things.
3:10 That he might manifest now to the ruler and the authorities in the (places) of the heavens through the church, the wisdom, of God which is of various kinds,
3:11 according to the ordinance from before the ages, this which he made in Christ Jesus our Lord,
3:12 he (lit. this) in whom we received the boldness and the access in [a] confidence through his faith.
3:13 Therefore I ask, not to faint in the tribulations for you, which is your glory.
3:14 Therefore I bend my knees to the Father,
3:15 from whom are named all the families in the heavens and upon the earth,
3:16 that he may give to you according to (the) riches of his glory to be strengthened in [a] power through his spirit.
3:17 To cause Christ to dwell in the inner man through the faith in your hearts; that ye, being rooted in [a] love, being firmly founded,
3:18 may be able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and the length and the height and the depth,
3:19 to know the love, which exceedeth (the) knowledge of Christ, that ye may be completed in all the completion of God,
3:20 for whom it is possible to do more than all things abundantly (more) than the things which we ask, or the things which we understand, according to the power which worketh in us,
3:21 His is the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus unto all the generations of (the) age of the ages. Amēn.
4:1 I beseech you then, I the prisoner in the Lord, to walk according to (the) worthiness of the calling to which ye were called,
4:2 in all humbleness of heart and [a] meekness and [a] longsuffering, Bearing with one another in [a] love;
4:3 hastening to keep the oneness of the spirit and the bond which is complete, of [the] peace.
4:4 One body and one spirit, according as ye were called in one hope of your calling:
4:5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism.
4:6 One is God the Father of all, who is upon all, and through all, and in all:
4:7 but to each one of us was given a grace according to (the) measure of the free gift of Christ.
4:8 Therefore he saith: He went to (the) height, he took captive a captivity, he gave gifts to [the] men.'
4:9 But the going up, what is it except that he went also to the parts which are below of (the) earth?
4:10 He who went down is he also who went up above all the heavens, that he might complete all things
4:11 And he (pron.) gave indeed apostles, but some as prophets, but others as preachers of good tidings, but others as shepherds and teachers;
4:12 for perfecting of the saints, unto a work of the ministry, unto a building of (the) body of Christ.
4:13 Until we all attain unto the oneness of the faith and (the) knowledge of (the) Son of God, unto a full grown man, unto a measure of the stature of (the) fulness of Christ:
4:14 that we may not be little children, thrown by (the) wave, being carried away in every wind of the doctrine, in the sleight of the men, in [a] craftiness towards the wiles of [the] error.
4:15 But doing (the) truth in [a] love, let us grow in (it) all things into him, who himself is the head, Christ;
4:16 he (lit. this) to whom the whole body is united and it is rationally consistent through all the joints of the supplies, according to the working in a measure of each one of the members; (and) maketh the growth of the body unto a building for him in [a] love.
4:17 But this I say, and I witness in the Lord, for you not to walk any more as the Gentiles walk in [a] vanity of their heart,
4:18 darkened in their thought, being strange to the life of God because of the ignorance which is in them, because of the hardening of their heart;
4:19 these who were without feeling gave themselves up to [a] defilement unto a work of all uncleanness in [a] wrongdoing.
4:20 But ye (are) they who have not been thus taught Christ;
4:21 if ye heard him, and were taught in him, according as [a] truth which is in Jesus:
4:22 that ye also may put away (lit. down) your former walk (of life), the old man, which will perish according to the lusts of the deceit;
4:23 but that ye may become new in the spirit of your heart,
4:24 and clothe you with the new man, which was created according to God in [a] righteousness and [a] holiness of (the) truth.
4:25 Therefore put away (lit. down) [the] falsehood, speak (the) truth each one with his neighbour: because we (are) members of one another.
4:26 Be angry, and sin not: (27) cause not (the) sun to set upon your wrath:
4:27 neither give place to the devil.
4:28 He who stealeth let him not steal any more; but rather let him toil, working with his hands the good, that he may find to give to him who is in want.
4:29 All evil words, cause them not to come from your mouth, but the good unto [an] edification of the need, that it may give [a] grace to them who hear.
4:30 And grieve not the holy spirit of God in which ye were sealed unto the day of the redemption.
4:31 All bitterness, and all wrath, and all anger, and all crying out, and all blasphemy, take away from you, and all malice.
4:32 Be ye kind to one another, compassionate, forgiving one another according as God forgave you in Christ.
5:1 Be ye then like to God, as beloved children;
5:2 And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savour.
5:3 But [the] fornication, and all uncleanness, or [a] wrongdoing, cause not them to say their (lit. her) name among you, according as it is worthy of the saints;
5:4 [the] empty words, and [the] words of folly or [the] jesting, these which it is not worthy to do: but rather [a] thanksgiving.
5:5 For this ye are knowing and ye are recognising, that no fornicator nor unclean man nor wrongdoer, which is [the] idolatry, hath inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God.
5:6 Cause not any one to deceive you in empty words, for because of these things cometh the anger of God upon the sons of [the] disobedience.
5:7 Be not ye then sharers with them;
5:8 for ye were being darkness once, but now a light in the Lord. Walk as children of the light;
5:9 for (the) fruit of the light was in all good and [a] righteousness and [a] truth – Chapter
5:10 proving what is pleasing to the Lord;
5:11 and be not sharers with the unfruitful works of (the) darkness, but rather even reprove (them);
5:12 for the things which they do secretly it is a shame even to mention them.
5:13 All things which the light reproveth are manifested: for everything which is manifested is [a] light.
5:14 Therefore he saith: Rise thou who sleepest, and stand (up) from them who are dead, and Christ shall enlighten thee.'
5:15 See then carefully my brethren, in what manner ye are walking, not as unwise, but as wise;
5:16 buying the time, because the days are evil.
5:17 Therefore be not ye foolish, but understand what is (the) wish of God.
5:18 And be not drunk with (lit. in) (the) wine, in which there is [a] dissoluteness, but ye completed in the spirit;
5:19 speaking among yourselves, psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, praising and playing to the Lord in your hearts;
5:20 giving thanks always for all, in (the) name of our Lord Jesus Christ and God (the) Father;
5:21 being subject to one another in the fear of Christ.
5:22 Let the wives be subject to their husbands, as to the Lord.
5:23 Because the man is (the) head of the wife, as Christ is (the) head of the church, he is (the) saviour of the body.
5:24 But as the church is subject to Christ, thus also let the wives be subject to their husbands in everything.
5:25 [The] men love your wives, according as Christ loved the church, and he gave himself for her;
5:26 that he might sanctify her, having sanctified her in (the) baptism of the water in (the) word,
5:27 that he might present to himself the church being in [a] glory, not spot in her or stain or any such thing; but that she might be holy and stainless.
5:28 Thus the men also ought to love their wives as their bodies. For he who loveth his wife loved himself.
5:29 For no one ever hated his flesh; but nourisheth it and cherisheth it, according as Christ also did the church;
5:30 because we (are) members of his body.
5:31 Therefore the man shall leave his father and his mother, and shall join himself to his wife; they (the) two shall become one flesh.
5:32 This mystery is great: but I (pron.) say (it) of Christ and the church.
5:33 Nevertheless ye also severally each of you, let him love his wife as himself; but the wife also, that she may reverence (lit. fear) her husband.
6:1 [The] children obey your parents in the Lord: for this is a righteous work.
6:2 Honour thy father and thy mother; that is to say, the first commandment which is in the promise,
6:3 that the good may be to thee, and that thou mayest spend a great time upon the earth.
6:4 [The] fathers anger not your children: but nourish them in an instruction and an understanding of the Lord.
6:5 [The] servants obey your masters according to flesh in [a] fear and [a] trembling, in [a] singleness of your heart, as obeying the Lord,
6:6 not in [an] eyeservice as pleasers of [the] men; but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from your souls;
6:7 with a good thought, as being servants to the Lord, and not man:
6:8 Knowing that each one--that which he will do good, this he will receive from the Lord, whether servant or free.
6:9 And ye also, namely the masters, do to them thus, putting away [the] anger: knowing that their and your Master is in the heavens, and there is not regard of person with him.
6:10 Finally, my brethren, take courage in the Lord, and in (the) strength of his power.
6:11 And clothe you with the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
6:12 Because our fight was not being to us against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual things of the evil in the (places) of the heavens.
6:13 Therefore take to you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, having done all things, (to) stand.
6:14 Stand, then, girding your loins in [a] truth, and clothe you with the breastplate of the righteousness;
6:15 put (lit. give) the shoe to your feet in (the) preparation of the Gospel of the peace.
6:16 And in all things take to you the shield of the faith, this in which ye will be able to quench all the fiery arrows of the evil.
6:17 And take to you the helmet of the salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God:
6:18 through all supplication and prayer, praying always in the spirit, and watching unto this in all perseverance and all prayer for all the saints,
6:19 and for me also, That a word may be given to me in (the) opening my mouth in [a] boldness, to manifest the mystery of the Gospel,
6:20 this for which I am an ambassador in a chain; that I may speak boldly in it, according as it is right for me that I should speak.
6:21 But that ye also may know concerning me, what I do; Tikhikos, the beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall show to you all things:
6:22 he (lit. this) whom I sent to you for this thing, That ye may know the things which happen to me, and that he may comfort your hearts.
6:23 [The] peace to the brethren, and [a] love with [a] faith, from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
6:24 (The) grace with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in [an] uncorruptness.
6:25