1:1 Paul and Silouanos and Timotheos to the church of Thessalonikē in God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1:2
1:3 It is worthy that we should give thanks to God always for you, our brethren, according as is worthy, because your faith abounded in growing, and (the) love of each one of you abounded unto one another;
1:4 so that we (pron.) boast ourselves in you in the churches of God for your patience and your faith in all your persecutions and your tribulations, these which ye receive:
1:5 unto a manifesting of the righteous judgement of God, to make you worthy of the kingdom of God, this for which ye suffer.
1:6 If it is a righteous judgement of God to recompense [an] affliction to them who afflict you,
1:7 and ye, namely they who are afflicted, to give [a] rest to you with us, in the revelation of our Lord Jesus from (the) heaven with the angels of his power
1:8 in a flame of fire, about to take vengeance on them who knew not God, and who obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus;
1:9 these who will receive a judgement of eternal destruction from before (the) face of the Lord and from before (the) glory of his power,
1:10 whenever he should come, being about to be glorified in the saints of his, To be wondered at in all who believed, because our witnessing to you was believed, in that day:
1:11 which is that concerning which we pray always for you, that our God may make us worthy of the calling, and complete all good pleasure of [the] goodness, and a work of (the) faith in [a] power.
1:12 That (the) name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and ye also in him, according to the grace of our God and our Lord Jesus Christ.
2:1 We beseech you, our brethren, for (the) coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our assembling also unto him,
2:2 that ye should not be moved quickly from the understanding; and that ye should not be troubled, neither through [a] spirit, nor through [a] word, nor through an epistle as through us, as that (the) day of the Lord approached.
2:3 Let not any deceive you according to any manner, that (it will be) unless should come first the apostasy and (the) man of [the] lawlessness, (the) son of (the) destruction should manifest himself,
2:4 the adversary; and should exalt himself over everything which is called 'god,' or that which is worshipped; so that he should go and sit in the temple of God, manifesting himself that he is [a] god.
2:5 Ye know not that, still being with you, we were saying these things to you.
2:6 And now also that which layeth hold ye know it, to cause him to be revealed in his time.
2:7 For the mystery of (the) lawlessness already is worked: only until that which layeth hold now ceaseth in (the) midst;
2:8 and then shall be revealed the lawless (one), whom the Lord Jesus will destroy in the spirit of his mouth, and he will do away with him in (the) manifestation of his coming.
2:9 He whose coming is being according to a working of Satan in all power and sign and false wonder,
2:10 and all deceit of (the) wrongdoing for them who will perish; because that they received not the love of (the) truth to cause them to be saved.
2:11 Therefore God will send to them a working of error, to cause them to believe the falsehood:
2:12 that all may be judged who believed not in the truth, but were well pleased with [the] wrongdoing.
2:13 But for us (lit. we), our brethren, it is worthy that we should give thanks to God for you always, namely those whom the Lord loved, because God chose you as a firstfruit of salvation in sanctification of the spirit and [a] faith of the truth;
2:14 which is that to which he called you through our Gospel unto a glorious lifegiving of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2:15 So then, our brethren, stand, and lay hold on the traditions which ye were taught, whether through [a] word or through an epistle of ours.
2:16 But our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, he who loved us, and he gave to us an eternal comfort, and a good hope in [a] grace,
2:17 he shall comfort your hearts, and he shall confirm you in every work and every good word.
3:1 Finally, our brethren, pray for us, that (the) word of the Lord may run and be glorified, according as also it happeneth among you;
3:2 that we may be saved from the evil and wicked men; for (the) faith is not possessed by all.
3:3 But the Lord is faithful, he who will confirm you, and he shall keep you from the evil.
3:4 But we are persuaded in the Lord about you, that ye do the things which we order you, and ye shall do them.
3:5 But (the) Lord shall direct your hearts in the love of God and the patience of Christ.
3:6 But we order you, our brethren, in (the) name of our Lord Jesus Christ to keep away from every brother who walketh unruly, and not according to the things which we delivered unto them.
3:7 For ye (pron.) know how ye ought to be like to us: because we were not unruly among you;
3:8 neither ate we [a] bread without cost of (any) one, but in [a] toil and [a] pain working in the day and the night, that we might not add burden to one of you:
3:9 not that we have not authority, but that we might give ourselves to you as (an) example, that ye might be like to us.
3:10 For even when we were with you, this we were ordering you, that he who wisheth not to work, neither let him even eat.
3:11 For we hear concerning some among you, walking unruly, and not working at all, but being busybodies.
3:12 But such, we order them, and we beseech in the Lord Jesus, that in [a] meekness doing their work, they may eat their bread.
3:13 But ye, our brethren, be not weary of doing the good.
3:14 If there is one disobedient to our word through the epistles, mark this (one) not to have company with him, that he may be shamed.
3:15 And let him not be with you as an enemy, but as a brother instruct him.
3:16 But the Lord himself of the peace shall give to you the peace always in every form. The Lord with you.
3:17 My salutation in mine own hand, Paul, which is a sign in all the epistles, thus I write.
3:18 (The) grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with you all.
3:19